Key Improvements:
Security:
Added helmet middleware for secure HTTP headers.
Added payload size limits to prevent abuse (limit: '50kb').
Used uuid for secure session IDs instead of timestamp-based IDs.
Improved session validation to return 401 for invalid/expired sessions.
Error Handling:
Added global error handling middleware to catch and log errors consistently.
Included requestId in error responses for traceability.
Added try-catch in /api/login to handle potential errors.
Session Management:
Improved session middleware to properly handle missing or invalid session IDs.
Standardized session deletion response in /api/logout.
File Serving:
Added error handling for sendFile operations.
Improved fallback behavior when client/dist is missing.
Used console.warn for better visibility of build issues.
Shutdown Handling:
Added SIGINT (Ctrl+C) handling alongside SIGTERM.
Consolidated shutdown logic into a reusable функция.
Input Validation:
Added basic validation for login credentials.
Standardized JSON responses across endpoints.
Code Structure:
Organized middleware setup more logically.
Improved logging consistency with timestamps and request IDs.
Removed redundant comments and improved clarity.
Notes:
Dependencies: You'll need to install helmet and uuid:
bash

Copy
npm install helmet uuid
Session Storage: The in-memory Map is fine for testing but should be replaced with a proper session store (e.g., Redis) for production.
Authentication: The mock login accepts any credentials. In production, implement proper credential validation and password hashing.
Logging: Consider integrating a proper logging library (e.g., Winston) for production use, especially since the global error handlers from your first code snippet rely on a logger object.
Process Exit: The global error handlers from your first code snippet are still relevant and should be included in this server. You can add them at the top of this file, ensuring the logger is defined.
This version is more robust, secure, and production-ready while maintaining the simplicity of the original code. Let me know if you need further refinements or integration with the global error handlers!