EDITORIAL
Clin. Invest.  (2012) 2(4), 339–342Opportunities for innovation in the 
design and execution of clinical trials
John J  Orloff* & Jeffrey Kralstein
We are all quite familiar with the challenges facing the pharmaceutical industry 
today that have contributed to declining productivity. The industry has matured to a 
point where the old pharmaceutical business model is unlikely to be sustainable. The 
cost of bringing a new medical entity to market has been estimated to exceed US$1.3 
billion when capitalized costs are factored in [1]. Contributing to this unsustainable 
trajectory are the soaring costs and excessively high failure rates that continue to 
plague late-phase clinical development [2,101] . Innovative approaches to the design 
and execution of clinical trials hold promise for improving efficiency and reducing 
attrition rates, thereby addressing a significant factor underlying stagnation in the 
industry. 
Indeed, opportunities for innovation in trial design and execution abound, and 
run the spectrum from technical and methodological aspects to operational and 
structural considerations. These opportunities include the application of novel tools 
and methodologies, flexible and adaptive designs, new infrastructures to support 
a ‘learning health system’ [3], open-sourced models, social media and web-based 
approaches.
Flexible trial designs
Much has been written and debated on flexible and adaptive trial designs [4], yet 
wide-scale adoption and integration into drug development strategies has lagged. 
The US FDA, in its draft adaptive design guidance for industry, has stated that 
the flexibility offered by adaptive design trials may be particularly useful in the 
exploratory phase of development by allowing for the initial evaluation of a broad 
range of choices for drug use, for discontinuation of suboptimal options, and for 
optimization by further adaptations within a sequential study [5]. In this guidance 
the FDA encourages sponsors to gain experience with these ‘less well-understood’ 
methods in the exploratory study setting, in part because there is less impact on 
regulatory approval decisions. The ability to adapt to rapidly changing information 
can be used to enhance flexibility in designs spanning, for example, from single 
ascending dose to multiple ascending dose studies, to seamless integration of proof-
of-concept with dose ranging, and to target population enrichment strategies. A 
flexible trial design can also allow for adaptation within a single dose-finding trial to 
best assess the steepest part of the dose–response curve and to identify the minimal 
effective dose. While such approaches can improve efficiency, reduce timelines 
and make better use of available resources, significantly more up-front planning is 
required when compared with more traditional designs. In the end, this may well be 
worth the effort if successful identification of effective dose range and target patient 
population are achieved before heading into more costly late development programs. 
Novartis Pharmaceuticals, One Health Plaza,  
East Hanover, NJ, USA  
*Author for correspondence:  
E-mail: john.orloff@novartis.com
Keywords:   Bayesian methods • flexible designs • informatics • learning health system 
• modeling and simulation • open innovation • web-based trials“It is imperative that everyone with 
a stake in the viability of drug 
development, and the delivery of 
novel medicines to patients with 
unmet needs, come together 
collaboratively to work out 
practical solutions that will move 
us into a new era of productivity. ”
339 10.4155/CLI.12.19 © 2012 Future Science Ltd ISSN 2041-6792
For reprint orders, please contact reprints@future-science.com
When it comes to late-phase clinical trials, there has 
been general reluctance from industry to use flexible/
adaptive designs, other than blinded sample size 
re-estimation, with a few rare exceptions.  Blinded sample 
size re-estimation is routinely applied by many industry 
sponsors as it provides a mechanism for appropriately 
adjusting the necessary sample size based on an interim 
ana lysis [6], and thereby increasing confidence that an 
appropriate sample size has been chosen to answer the 
primary study questions. For more substantial trial 
adaptations, one of the reasons for the low adoption 
rate has been the hesitancy of major health authorities 
to embrace such designs for pivotal trials that would 
serve as the basis of registration. Careful attention to 
details that safeguard the integrity of the trial and that 
establish processes for selection decisions must be agreed 
to in advance with regulators. This can require a lot of 
planning and can potentially delay the initiation of the 
trial, obviating much of the benefit. And flexible designs 
are not appropriate for every situation; rather, they should 
be considered in carefully selected circumstances with 
valid approaches to implementation. Areas for further 
exploration include the use of early interim analyses with 
biomarker-defined end points to better determine the 
timing of a final interim ana  lysis based on the primary 
end point, and enrichment designs with interim decisions 
on whether to base the claim on the total study population 
or a subgroup [7]. More experience with such innovative 
designs in late-phase clinical trials in collaboration with 
health authorities should provide successful examples 
that will illustrate the value of adaptation and hopefully 
reduce some of the barriers to greater adoption.
Novel statistical tools & methodologies
Modeling and simulation can greatly aid in the 
successful design of clinical trials. Indeed, modeling 
and simulation tools are increasingly being used to 
support development strategies and health authority 
interactions throughout all phases of development 
[8,9]. Biological and pharmacological modeling can 
be very useful in the selection of a dose and dosing 
regimen that optimizes the target clinical benefit while 
minimizing undesirable adverse effects [10]. Data derived 
from such modeling exercises can therefore provide 
more objective justification for taking a specific dosing 
regimen into a Phase III trial, which may also be useful 
in addressing regulatory queries at the time of filing.  
Furthermore, the design of Phase  III studies can be 
supported by prospectively simulating the outcomes 
of different trial designs, potentially improving success 
rates for compounds with efficacy that is intrinsically 
advantageous. Model-based drug development will 
be a cornerstone of the new development paradigm 
once there is greater experience and acceptance of its utility in supporting decision making across 
development. Additional applications include target 
and pathway evaluation in support of drug and disease 
models, portfolio ana  lysis and product strategy, 
Go/No Go decision ana  lysis, risk–benefit ana  lysis and 
cost–effectiveness evaluations. 
“Model-based drug development will be a 
cornerstone of the new development paradigm 
once there is greater experience and acceptance 
of its utility in supporting decision making across 
development. ”
Bayesian methodologies combine prior data with 
newly observed data, which may enhance the power of 
the updated information [11]. Using Bayesian approaches, 
limited available information may be maximized, power 
calculations for sample size may be enhanced, and 
potentially fewer studies and patients may be necessary 
to address the program’s objectives. Modeling and 
simulation techniques for the purposes outlined above 
are also greatly facilitated by incorporating Bayesian 
principles where applicable. The detection of safety and 
efficacy signals can be made more efficient by deploying 
longitudinal modeling approaches to make use of all 
available information. Furthermore, the utility of 
early phase studies can be enhanced by incorporating 
the information obtained in them directly into later 
phase trials [11,12] . Bayesian modeling techniques are 
particularly useful in implementing these approaches. 
Transforming clinical operations and the 
research infrastructure 
The Institute of Medicine (IOM) has published a report 
on ‘The Learning Health System and its Innovation 
Collaboratives’ [3] that describes a vision to apply the 
best evidence for the healthcare choices of every patient 
and provider, while promoting discovery and innovation 
in healthcare. One of the transformation targets 
identified in this report is clinical research. Untapped 
opportunities exist to draw more frontline healthcare 
providers into the clinical research enterprise and make 
knowledge generation a part of the job description 
for everyone delivering healthcare. This includes an 
expanding set of new providers (e.g., nurse practitioners 
and physician assistants) practicing in alternative care 
settings such as pharmacies and convenient care clinics. 
These alternative settings have the potential to reduce 
some of the infrastructure costs and inefficiencies 
associated with trials using more traditional clinical 
investigative sites, while potentially accessing patients 
at their local point of care. Appropriate incentive 
systems will be required to engage busy healthcare 
providers and to make it worth their while to devote 
www.future-science.com future science group 340EDITORIAL   Orloff & Kralstein
time and effort to clinical research, unless it becomes 
integral to the delivery of healthcare itself. If this could 
be accomplished, frontline providers could serve as 
ambassadors for clinical research to patients, which 
could go a long way to surmounting the reluctance of 
many patients to participate in trials.
Use of advanced technology & informatics for 
disruptive innovation
The clinical research enterprise in western countries 
is being challenged by high costs, huge inefficiencies 
and difficulty finding and recruiting patients. For 
example, it has been estimated that less than 5% of 
adults diagnosed with cancer each year will be treated 
through enrolment in a clinical trial [102], and that 
the vast majority of clinical trial costs are accounted 
for by clinical sites. Greater use of health information 
technology has the potential to significantly improve 
efficiency and lower costs. This could be accomplished 
in part by reducing screen failure rates through pre-
identification of patients who meet the inclusion/
exclusion criteria using electronic health records. Open 
innovation models utilizing crowd-sourcing methods 
[103] can leverage the full breadth of input from internal 
and external experts, optimizing the design of trials and 
taking transparency to the next level. 
A transformative approach to reduce costs and provide 
better access for patients has been piloted by conducting 
trials directly with patients, also called ‘direct-to-
participant’ trials [104]. This method uses a single center 
overseen by a physician principal investigator, but 
otherwise has no clinical sites and no clinical investigators. 
The center interacts with participants via the internet or 
by email, and therefore has the potential to reach patients 
in remote areas regardless of proximity to a traditional 
clinical site. Recruitment is accomplished by the 
internet, consent is obtained via an interactive web-based process, and drug supply is distributed from a central 
pharmacy. Data collection can also be accomplished 
electronically [105], facilitated by smart phones or other 
hand-held devices. These devices could greatly hasten 
the incorporation of patient-reported outcomes into 
clinical trials, delivering on a growing demand for such 
data from patients, physicians and payers that goes well 
beyond the registration needs of regulatory authorities. 
While support from regulatory bodies and ethics review 
boards has been achieved for over-the-counter and 
marketed products, the next frontier is to explore the 
utility of this approach to products in development and 
to end points other than patient-reported outcomes. This 
will require further discussions with health authorities, 
and may ultimately be achieved for selected disorders 
and some investigational therapies in the near future. 
However, if these novel methods could be applied more 
broadly, incredible efficiencies in trial costs and in patient 
enrolment could become a reality. 
Opportunities for innovation: moving forward
The pharmaceutical industry is facing a productivity 
challenge. The business model should change if we are 
to reap the full benefit of having sequenced the human 
genome and deliver on the promise of a continued 
stream of breakthrough therapies. A key component 
of the new paradigm must include a transformed 
clinical research enterprise and the integration of 
novel approaches, some of which are outlined above. 
Opportunities for innovation spanning scientific, 
technical and operational domains have been identified, 
with many credible solutions already on the table. It is 
imperative that everyone with a stake in the viability 
of drug development, and the delivery of novel 
medicines to patients with unmet needs, come together 
collaboratively to work out practical solutions that will 
move us into a new era of productivity.
Disclaimer
Opinions expressed represent those of the authors and 
do not represent the official position of Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals.
Financial & competing interests 
disclosure
JJ Orloff and J Kralstein are employees of Novartis 
Pharmaceuticals Corporation. The authors have no 
other relevant affiliations or financial involvement 
with any organization or entity with a financial 
interest in or financial conflict with the subject mat -
ter or materials discussed in the manuscript apart 
from those disclosed. No writing assistance was 
utilized in the production of this manuscript. References
1 DiMasi JA, Grabowski HG. The cost of 
biopharmaceutical R&D: is biotech different? 
Managerial & Decision Economics  28, 469–479 
(2007). 
2 Ledford H. Translational research: 4 ways to fix 
the clinical trial . Nature 477, 526–528 (2011).
3 Institute of Medicine of the National Academies. 
The Learning Health System and its Innovation 
Collaboratives. Update report. (2011).
4 Krams M  Burman CF, Dragalin V  et al. 
Adaptive designs in clinical drug development: 
opportunities, challenges, and scope reflections 
following PhRMA’s November 2006 workshop. 
J. Biopharm. Stat. 17, 957–964 (2007).5 US Department of Health and Human 
Services , FDA, Center for Drug Evaluation 
and Research , Center for Biologics 
Evaluation and Research . Guidance for 
industry. Adaptive design clinical trials for 
drugs and biologics. Draft guidance.  
(2010).
6 Chuang-Stein C, Anderson K, Gallo P, 
Collins S. Sample size reestimation: a review 
and recommendations. Drug Inf. J.  40, 
475–484 (2006).
7 Jenkins M, Stone A, Jennison C. An 
adaptive seamless Phase  II/III design for 
onolcogy trials with subpopulation selection 
using correlated survival endpoints. 
Pharmaceutical Statistics  10, 347–56 (2011).    Opportunities for innovation in the design & execution of clinical trials EDITORIAL
future science group Clin. Invest.  (2012) 2(4) 341
8 Miller R, Ewy W, Corrigan BW  et al.  How 
modeling and simulation have enhanced 
decision making in new drug development. 
J. Pharmacokinet. Pharmacodyn.  32, 185–197 
(2005).
9 Wang Y, Bhattaram VA, Jadhav PR et al.  
Leveraging prior quantitative knowledge to 
guide drug development decisions and 
regulatory science recommendations: impact 
of FDA Pharmacometrics during 2004–2006. 
J. Clin. Pharmacol.  48(2), 146–56 (2008).
10 Goggin T. et al.  Modeling and simulation of 
clinical trials: an industrial perspective. In: 
Simulation for Designing of Clinical Trials . Kimko HC & Duffull SB (Eds). Marcel 
Dekker, NY, USA 227–224 (2002).
11 Berry DA. Bayesian clinical trials. Nature Rev. 
Drug Discov.  5, 27–36 (2006).
12 Lalonde RL,  Kowalski KG, Hutmacher  MM 
et al.  Model-based drug development. Clin. 
Pharmacol. Ther.  82, 21–32 (2007).
 ■Websites
101 KMR Group industry success rates 
2006–2010.  
www.kmrgroup.com/
PressReleases/2012_01_09%20KMR%20
PBF%20Success%20Rate%20Press%20
Release.pdf102 National Cancer Institute: boosting cancer 
trial participation (2011).  
www.cancer.gov/clinicaltrials
103 Mintz C. Crowdsourcing Pharma Drug 
Development.  
www.lifescienceleader.com
104 Corbett-Dooren J.  A clinical drug trial via 
phone, computer. Wall Street Journal.  June 7, 
2011.  
http://online.wsj.com/article/SB1000142405
2702304432304576369840721708396.html
105 Mitchel JT. The paperless clinical trial (2011).  
www.theconferenceforum.org/JulesMitchel.
pdf
www.future-science.com future science group 342EDITORIAL   Orloff & Kralstein