1
ICH Q3D(R 2)
Elemental Impurities
Step 4 document –to be implemented
27 May 202 2
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements
for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use


2Legal Notice
•This presentation is protected by copyright and may , with the exception of the ICH 
logo, be used, reproduced, incorporated into other works, adapted, modified, 
translated or distributed under a public license provided that ICH's copyright in the 
presentation is acknowledged at all times. In case of any adaption, modification or 
translation of the presentation, reasonable steps must be taken to clearly label, 
demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to or based on the original 
presentation. Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation of the 
original presentation is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided. 
•The presentation is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. In no event shall 
the ICH or the authors of the original presentation be liable for any claim, damages 
or other liability arising from the use of the presentation.
•The above -mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties. 
Therefore, for documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for 
reproduction must be obtained from this copyright holder.ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
2

3Background
•This document was developed based on a Concept 
Paper (15 September 2016) and an updated Work Plan 
(4 February 2022).
•After the public consultation and the EWG discussion, 
the document including Limits for Elemental Impurities 
by the Cutaneous and Transcutaneous Route and 
some corrected permitted daily exposures (PDEs) has 
been signed off as Step 4 document (26 April 2022) to 
be implemented by the ICH Regulatory Members. ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

4Key Principles
•This presentation will provide a summary of the new 
Appendix for “ Limits for Elemental Impurities by the 
Cutaneous and Transcutaneous Route”
•This presentation will concomitantly provide summaries 
of the error corrections to the PDEs of 3 elemental 
impurities in ICH Q3D(R1). ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

5Guideline Objectives
•The objectives and scope remain the same as indicated 
in the ICH Q3D Guideline finalized in December 2014.
•The Guideline revision (R2) is focused on establishment 
of limits for elemental impurities by the dermal route of 
exposure.
•The Guideline revision (R2) also includes error 
corrections of the PDEs for silver (oral) , gold (oral, 
parenteral and inhalation) and n ickel (inhalation).ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

6Table of Contents 
•Summary of limits for elemental impurities (EI) by 
the cutaneous and transcutaneous route
•Error correction of silver (Ag) PDE by oral route 
exposure
•Error corrections of the gold (Au) PDEs by oral, 
parenteral and inhalation routes exposure
•Error correction of nickel (Ni) by inhalation route 
exposureICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

7Summary of cutaneous PDEs
•The new appendix document of cutaneous PDEs of 
elemental impurities were developed by the EWG. The 
table of contents of the appendix is as follows.
1.Background
2.Scope
3.Principles of Safety Assessment for Cutaneous Products
4.Establishing The Cutaneous Permitted Daily Exposure (PDE)
5.Cutaneous Concentration Limits for Ni And Co
6.Product Risk Assessment
7.Cutaneous PDE Values
8.ReferencesICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

8Summary of cutaneous PDEs (1)
•Background
➢Dermal absorption is dependent upon the properties of the 
skin, the anatomical site, the nature of the chemical applied 
and the characteristics of the application. But q uantitative 
data are generally lacking for most EI and its ions
➢Ageneric approach was adopted to establish limits as 
opposed to an element -by-element basis
•Scope
➢This Appendix does not apply to drug products intended for 
mucosal administration, topical ophthalmic, rectal, or 
subcutaneous and subdermal routes of administrationICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

9Summary of cutaneous PDEs (2)
•Principles of Safety Assessment 
➢In general, there is no indication for local toxicity on the skin, 
with the exception of sensitization
➢A generic approach for deriving a cutaneous PDE has been 
developed based on a systematic adjustment of the 
parenteral PDE, which assumes 100% bioavailability
➢The available data indicate that EIs are generally poorly 
absorbed through intact skin even in the presence of 
enhancers.
➢For drug products intended to treat skin with substantial 
disruption of the basal cell layer of the epidermis, the 
parenteral PDE is generally an appropriate starting pointICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

10Summary of cutaneous PDEs (3)
•Establishing The Cutaneous PDE (for systemic toxicity)
➢The limited available data suggest that transcutaneous 
absorption of most EI is less than 1% for intact skin
➢The Cutaneous Modifying Factor (CMF) was developed for 
deriving protective PDE due to lack of reliable quantitative dataICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
1. For EIs other than arsenic (As) and thallium (Tl), a 
maximum Cutaneous Bioavailability (CBA) of 1% is used. 
2. To account for the various factors that can enhance CBA, a 
factor of 10 is applied to increase the CBA (adjusted CBA).
3. To calculate the CMF, the parenteral BA (100%) is divided by 
the adjusted CBA.

11Summary of cutaneous PDEs (4)
•Establishing The Cutaneous PDE (for systemic toxicity)
Cutaneous PDE = Parenteral PDE x CMF
➢PDE for EIs (other than TI and As) (CMF= 10)
(Adjusted CBA = 1%(absorption) X10 =10%;  ∴CMF = 100% / 10% = 10)
⚫Cutaneous PDE = Parenteral PDE x 10
➢PDE for As(CMF = 2, absorption is approximately 5%)
(Adjusted CBA = 5%(absorption) X10 =50%;  ∴CMF = 100% / 50% = 2)
⚫Cutaneous PDE = 15 μg/day x 2 = 30 μg/day
➢PDE for TI (CMF = 1, absorption is high, but no quantitative data)
(Adjusted CBA = 100% (absorption);  ∴CMF = 100% / 100% = 1)
⚫Cutaneous PDE = 8 μg/day x 1= 8 μg/dayICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

12Summary of cutaneous PDEs (5)
•Cutaneous and Transcutaneous Concentration Limits (CTCL) 
for Ni and Co 
➢The CTCL in addition to the PDE is warranted for Ni and Co 
to reduce the likelihood of eliciting skin reactions in already 
sensitized individuals. 
➢The dermal concentration limit of 0.5 μg/cm2/week  (EU 
directive) is applied to set a CTCL of Ni.
•The CTCL calculation is based on that cutaneous products application 
of 1 FTU (fingertip unit) corresponding to 0.5 g dose is normally applied 
to a skin surface area of 250 cm2. 
➢Recent report suggested the same CTCL is applied to Co.ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
0.5 μg/cm2/week = 0.07 μg/cm2/day
0.07 μg/cm2/day x 250 cm2= 17.5 μg/day
17.5 μg/day / 0.5 g/day = 35 µg/g

13Summary of cutaneous PDEs (6)
•Product Risk Assessment
➢Product assessments for cutaneous drug products should be 
prepared following the guidance provided in ICH Q3D Section 5
➢For Ni and Co, the concentration (µg/g) in the drug product 
should be assessed relative to the CTCL, in addition to the PDE
➢The total Ni and Co level ( μg/day) is at or below the PDE, and 
their respective concentrations do not exceed the CTCL
➢“Control threshold” approach is also applied to the CTCL 
➢Evaluation of the retention during typical conditions of use is 
important for multiple applications aday. (see Module 1, ICH 
Q3D training package)ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

14Error correction of Ag PDE by parenteral route
•The parenteral PDE for silver (Ag) is based on a lowest 
observed adverse effect level (LOAEL) of 0.014 mg/kg using 
long-term human intravenous exposure data. But, the cited 
LOAEL (from the reference dose ( RfD) of US EPA IRIS 
document) in the monograph had been already adjusted for 
oral route exposure
•After further review, the original study cited in the monograph 
was considered in error. It was considered inadequate to set a 
parenteral PDE as it involved a low number of patients, and 
the dosing was not adequately describedICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

15Error correction of Ag PDE by parenteral route
•The EWG developed the corrected parenteral PDE as 
follows
•In a review of the oral toxicity of silver, Hadrup and Lam 
(2014) report that absorption of a radionuclide of silver (as 
silver nitrate) was 18% in human.
•the parenteral PDE was calculated by dividing the oral PDE 
by a modifying factor of 10 (as described in Section 3.1). 
(in the case of oral bioavailability between 1% and 50%)
•The recommended PDE for silver for parenteral exposure is:
PDE = 167 µg/day / 10 = 16.7 µg/day
•The rounded parenteral PDE in Table A.2.1 is 15 µg/dayICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

16Error correction of Au PDE by all route
•The monograph of Gold (Au) explained that “derivation of the 
oral PDE of Au is based on a study in mice (Ahmed 2012)”.      
But, the study was conducted in rats 
•F1 of 5 (for rats) in PDE calculation should be used instead of 
F1 of 12(for mice)
•The oral PDE calculation should be corrected as follows
PDE = 32.2 mg/kg x 50 kg / 12x 10 x 10 x 1 x 10 = 134 µg/day
PDE = 32.2 mg/kg x 50 kg / 5x 10 x 10 x 1 x 10 = 322 µg/day
The parenteral PDE is same as the oral PDE, and the inhalation PDE is 1/100 of the oral PDE
•The PDEs in Table A.2.1 should be also corrected as followsICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
element Oral parenteral inhalation
Au 322 322 3.2
element oral parenteral inhalation
Au 300 300 3Monograph
Table A.2.1

17Error correction of Ni PDE by inhalation route
•The derivation procedure of Ni PDE by inhalation in the ICH 
Q3D Step 4 document in 2014 was not changed from that in 
the ICH Q3D Step 2 document in 2013. There was no issue 
or discussion between the ICH Q3D Step 2 and ICH Q3D 
Step 4
•The EWG concluded that the current PDE of Ni by inhalation 
was a transcription error at the ICH Q3D Step 4 publication in 
2014
•The EWG recommend that the PDE of Ni by inhalation in 
Table A.2.1 should be corrected to “ 6 μg/day ” from “5 μg/day” 
(There is no need to change the Ni monograph itself)ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
element oral parenteral inhalation
Ni 200 20 6Table A.2.1 in STEP2

18Results of Public Consultation
•No major changes were made in response to the 
public comments.
•In order to address the questions raised in the pub -
comments, additional or modified sentences were 
given in the following parts of the text, footnotes, 
and table legends.
➢At the end of Scope and the footnote of Scope
➢At the end of Section 5
➢At the end of the second last paragraph in the Section 6
➢At the legend #4 in the Table A.5.1 and the #2 in the Table A.5.2ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

19Considerations
•The ICH Q3D Guideline is not intended to provide 
recommendations for labelling of allergens.  
Applicants should refer to regional 
guidance/recommendations or best practice for 
managing and labeling of allergens. 
(from the footnote of Scope in the Appendix 5) ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

20Guidelines for Implementation
•The new Appendix 5 to the ICH Q3D Guideline applies to 
cutaneous and transcutaneous drug products whether 
intended for local or systemic effect.  
•The Appendix does not apply to drug products intended 
for mucosal administration (oral, nasal, vaginal), topical 
ophthalmic, rectal, or subcutaneous and subdermal 
routes of administration. 
•Products not covered by this Appendix should be 
evaluated in accordance with the approach discussed in 
section 3.2 of the main text of the ICH Q3D Guideline.
(from Scope of Appendix 5)ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

21Conclusions (1)
•Develop a new Appendix for “Limits for Elemental 
Impurities by the Cutaneous and Transcutaneous Route”
•This Appendix does not apply to drug products intended 
for mucosal administration, topical ophthalmic, rectal, or 
subcutaneous and subdermal routes of administration
•Establish the cutaneous PDE of all EIs for systemic 
toxicity (See Table A.5.1)
•Establish the CTCL for Ni and Co for sensitized patients
•The total Ni or Co level is at or below the cutaneous 
PDE, and their respective concentrations do not exceed 
the CTCLICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use

22Conclusions (2)
•The original PDEs for silver (Ag), for gold (Au), and for nickel 
(Ni) were incorrect due to calculation or transcription errors.
•The EWG re-evaluated the relevant data and identified the 
corrected PDE of Ag, and corrected a modifying factor of Au, 
and corrected a transcription error of Ni.
•The corrected PDE of Ag by the parenteral route is identified 
as 15 mg/day.
•The corrected PDEs of Au by the oral, parenteral and 
inhalation routes are identified as 300, 300 and 3 mg/day, 
respectively.
•The corrected PDE in Table A.2.1of Ni by the inhalation route
is identified as 6 mg/day.ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use

23Contact
•For any questions please contact the ICH Secretariat: 
admin@ich.org ICH Q3D(R2): Cutaneous PDEs and error corrections

