The guides are part of the Patient Engagement Management Suite - a hub for effective and practical patient engagement.How-to Guide on Patient 
Engagement in Clinical 
Trial Protocol Design

  2  2
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Table of contents  
Introduction and overview of the work  
How was it developed?  
Who is this guide for?
How to use this How-to Guide?
Context  
Step 1  - Preparations for setting up partnership and collaboration 
1.1 Define partnership and collaboration goals 
1.2  Identify patient partners and initiate a partnership 
Identify patient partners 
Initiating a partnership 
Step 2 - Building a partnership for optimal patient engagement  
2.1 Clarify the project plan and goals 
2.2 Define the project timelines 
2.3 Contracting considerations 
2.4 Managing expectations and other considerations
2.5 Deciding on the methods and formats for sponsor–patient partner interactions
Interaction formats 
Methods and approaches for patient engagement
2.6 Involving others in the partnership activities  
Step 3 - Patient Engagement in the Clinical Trial Protocol Design 
3.1 Collecting patient partners insights for Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Additional considerations
3.2 Key questions and considerations for the development of a clinical trial protocol with 
patient partners 
3.3 Analysis of patient partner insights  
Step 4 - Feedback and follow-up  
Advantages of long-term patient engagement
Considerations for Patient Engagement
Acknowledgements
Annex 1  I  Patient Engagement Quality criteria definitions   
References
Glossary of terms 2
3
3
4
5
6
7
7
8
8
9
11
11
12
13
15
16
17
17
18
20
20
22
22
29
30
31
32
35
37
39
42Table of contentsTable of contents
  3  3
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Introduction and overview of the work
1 Access at: https://pemsuite.org/how-to-guides/
2 Please find the Patient Engagement Quality Guidance resources here: https://pemsuite.org/peqg/.  The Patient Engagement 
Quality Guidance can support the preparation and planning of a partnership in the process of Clinical Trial Protocol Design. 
The seven criteria of the PEQG have been adapted to fit the scenarios, type of activities and stakeholders involved. The Patient 
Engagement Quality Guidance (PEQG) has two scenarios with respective considerations; scenario 1 for planning PE activities 
and scenario 2 for assessing ongoing and completed projects for their PE quality. Link to scenario 1 (planning PE): http://
patientfocusedmedicine.org/peqg/patient-engagement-quality-guidance-scenario-1.pd
3 Deane, K., Delbecque, L., Gorbenko, O. et al. on behalf of the PFMD Patient Engagement Meta-framework Co-creation Team. 
Co-creation of patient engagement quality guidance for medicines development: an international multi stakeholder initiative. 
BMJ Innovations 2019;5:43-55.Patient Focused Medicines Development (PFMD) partners with patients to design and improve global 
healthcare. PFMD focuses on making patient engagement a systematic reality by co-creating much-
needed resources that enable all stakeholders to embark on and enhance their patient engagement 
journey. PFMD involved multi-stakeholder working groups in developing the How-to Guides series1. 
These How-to Guides build on the Patient Engagement Quality Guidance (PEQG2,3) tool and provide 
step by step recommendations to involve patient partners in specific activities and/or phases in 
the drug development continuum. Each How-to Guide functions as a standalone tool but can also 
be easily combined with the other How-to Guides to form a comprehensive roadmap for patient 
engagement activities. 
The following How-to Guides are currently available:
 ●How-to Guide for Patient Engagement in the Early Discovery and Preclinical phases ;
 ●Plain language summaries (PLS) of peer-reviewed publications and conference presentations: 
practical ‘How-To’ Guide for multi-stakeholder co-creation.
How was it developed? 
The Guide is a true example of co-creation, having involved more than 35 multi-stakeholders 
contributors from more than 26 organizations, including patient experts, the pharmaceutical industry, 
clinical research organizations, and external consultants with the relevant experience/expertise in 
the activity. Each draft of this particular How-To Guide was reviewed internally, tested and agreed 
upon by the group, and further validated during external consultations. The Patient Engagement 
Quality Guidance (PEQG) is proposed as a reference in planning and preparing for involving patients 
in the process of designing a clinical trial protocol. The seven Criteria of the PEQG have been specially 
adapted to fit the scenarios, type of activities and stakeholders involved. Introduction and overview of the work 
How was it developed?
  4  4
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
This How-to Guide has been developed for anyone who needs to be involved in the implementation 
of Patient Engagement in the design of a clinical trial protocol. Specifically, this Guide has been          
co-created to:
 ●Allow for comprehensive guidance to be outlined in a single document.
 ●Compile information related to specific steps in the patient engagement process in sequential 
sections, even if information is repeated, in order to eliminate the need to consult multiple 
documents.
The guide will give more clarity, instructions and the key terminology to Patients, Carers, Patient 
Organizations, Industry (Pharma, Biotech, Devices), Academia, Researchers, Contract Research 
Organisations (CROs) on how to co-create a clinical trial protocol with patients.
In the guide, the use of the terminology of “Sponsor” makes reference to a person, company, 
academic institution or other organization that initiates, manages (including collecting and 
analyzing the data) or finances a clinical trial.  Who is this guide for? 
Figure 1.  Relevant stakeholders in patient engagement in the clinical trial protocol designPolicymakers Patient 
Organizations and 
associations
Regulators
PayersHealthcare 
professionalsPatients and 
carers
Patient advocates, 
patient organizations 
and associationsIndustry (Pharma, 
Biotech, Devices)OtherContract 
Research 
Organizations 
ResearchersWho is this guide for?
  5  5
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
This How-to Guide should always be used in a relevant and applicable manner to the project at 
hand. This How-to Guide (as with all PFMD How-to Guides) has been built to be used alongside the 
PFMD Patient Engagement Quality Guidance (PEQG), which defines seven Quality Criteria for good 
patient engagement. The PEQG should be used as a reference in setting up partnerships, planning, 
and preparing for involving patients as partners in your research. The seven Quality Criteria can help 
consider others’ expectations and manage them. 
This How-to Guide is organized around 4 steps that outline key moments and aspects for patient 
engagement in clinical trial protocol design, including:
 ●Step 1 - Preparations for setting up partnership and collaboration
This step focuses on the definition of collaboration goals to prepare for a meaningful partnership. 
This also includes the identification and selection of the partnership activities.
 ●Step 2 -Building a partnership for optimal patient engagement
This step focuses on defining the scope, expectations and project timelines for a beneficial 
partnership, including the methods and formats for the engagement activities. It also considers 
other stakeholders that can be involved to understand patients’ perspectives and drive 
successful outcomes from patient engagement.
 ●Step 3 -Patient Engagement in the Clinical Trial Protocol Design
This step focuses on ensuring that the protocol is co-developed with patient partners in order to 
take into account the practicalities, logistics, unmet needs, safety, ethics, and data collection that 
add value and adequately capture meaningful endpoints and patient outcome.
 ●Step 4 -Feedback and follow-up
This step focuses on providing guidance on ways to continue the collaboration after the formal 
ending of the initial project.How to use this How-to Guide?How to use this How-to Guide?
The technical terms (in bold red text) have a definition in the Glossary section.Figure 2. How-to Guide on PE in Clinical Trial Protocol Design

  6  6
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
A successful clinical trial is a key milestone of the medicine development continuum. There is strong 
evidence that a well designed clinical trial protocol can not only impact patient recruitment but 
also help overcome retention issues. Patients’ continued involvement throughout a clinical trial can 
also lead to an increase in use and uptake of research results by other patients and the healthcare 
system as a whole4. Patient engagement in clinical trial protocol design ensures that a clinical trial is 
designed to consider the patient’s perspective. 
A well-designed protocol takes into account the  unmet needs, safety, ethics, and data collection 
that add value and adequately capture meaningful endpoints and patient outcomes5 but also the  
practicalities and logistics aspects. In addition, it is gathering  information to strengthen study designs 
and optimize clinical trial procedures & execution, clinical endpoints, and data generation so that 
they are seen as valuable to and address the needs and preferences of the  patients, while also being 
supportive for subsequent regulatory and reimbursement discussions if applicable. 
The role of patient partners6 helping the sponsors with the co-design of the clinical trial protocol is 
becoming recognized as a good practice to establish systematically. However, little is known on how 
to proceed with the engagement of patient partners, and when the partnership should be initiated to 
generate the highest impact. 
This How-to Guide builds on existing guidelines (PCORI, Transcelerate, CTTI) and provides             
directions for meaningful patient engagement throughout the process of the development of the 
clinical trial protocol. ContextContext
4 Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). (2018) The value of Engagement. Available at:  pcori.org/engagement/
value-engagement
5 For more information, check the How-to Guide on Patient Engagement in the Development of a Clinical Outcome Assessment 
(COA) strategy. Available at: link available when How-to Guide will be finalized. 
6 Which differ from the clinical trial participants.
  7  7
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Step 1
Preparations for setting up partnership and collaborationPreparations for setting up 
partnership and collaboration
1.1. Define partnership and collaboration goalsThe objective of this step is to:
 ●Define partnership and collaboration goals to prepare for meaningful, effective and respectful 
interactions and a mutually beneficial partnership. 
 ●Identify, select and invite patient partners for the partnership activities and prepare your 
research team.
Establishing meaningful long-term relationships, understanding patients’ views on collaboration 
with sponsors and recognizing the value for both groups are critical to successful collaborations in 
medicines R&D. The timing of the initial interaction and the steps leading up to it are both critical. 
There are different ways in which initial conversations about patient engagement in clinical trials may 
arise between patient partners and sponsors. Sponsors may have a specific project or program on 
which they wish to seek input from patients. A patient organization may be looking for opportunities 
for their members to shape the direction of drug development. Opportunities may also arise out of 
existing patient engagement partnerships in other stages of drug development.
A key part of identifying opportunities is having an open and honest conversation about the purpose 
of working together and what each stakeholder hopes to achieve. Stakeholders should work together 
to scope ideas and opportunities and agree on a shared purpose for the collaboration. 
Even if the sponsor has pre-defined the scope of the collaboration, they should still, when 
possible, discuss and define each step with the patient partners.Figure 3.  Step 1 of the How-to Guide

  8  8
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaboration
1.2. Identify patient partners and initiate a partnership
Identify patient partners 
This step bridges the gap between patient organizations and sponsors to set the stage for the 
selection of suitable partners. Patient organizations know their patients and thus can often 
recommend to sponsors patient partners who may be interested. However, the objective of the 
collaboration may sometimes require partnership with various profiles of patients to approximate 
representability of the global population.
To meaningfully conduct a patient engagement activity, the right patient partners need to be identified. 
Patient organizations - where they exist - are the first and key point of contact to identify individuals           
and/or experts to engage to ensure the the right match for the right activity. 
The patient organization and sponsors should also consider:
 ●Does their infrastructure allow them to set up a partnership easily? Or would support be needed to 
make collaboration happen?
 ●Are the project timelines, expected duration, frequency of interactions, and technology used feasible?
Brief considerations for identifying a list of potential patient partners: 
 ●The type of patient partner profile needed (i.e., ‘naive’ patient, patient advocate, patient expert, 
carer or family member, patient community). 
 ●The level of research expertise the patient partner should have (and if any training or education 
may be needed). 
 ●The role the patient partner will take and how complex it is. (See the description of the four levels 
of patient partner contribution below)
 ●The patient partner’s medical condition profile.
 ●The patient partner’s ability to mobilize their community. For example, what is the size, scope, 
and geographical footprint of their network?
 ●Other capabilities and competencies needed from the patient partner7.
7 Access at: http://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/pe-capabilities/. See also “Tackling Representativeness” from the National 
Health Council. Add footnote: NCH “Tackling Representativeness” Available at: https://nationalhealthcouncil.org/wp-content/
uploads/2019/12/Representativeness%20in%20Patient%20Engagement.pdf
8 Access via: PARADIGM. (2020) Patient engagement in medicines development: Recommendations on how to find the right match 
for the right patient engagement activity. Available at: https://synapse.pfmd.org/resources/patient-engagement-in-medicines-
development-recommendations-on-how-to-find-the-right-match-for-the-right-patient-engagement-activity , pages 9-10
See ‘Patient engagement in medicines development: Recommendations on how to find the 
right match for the right patient engagement activity.‘ to support identifying the right patient 
partners8. 
  9  9
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaboration
Initiating a partnership
Initiating the partnership is about establishing contact between the sponsor and the patient partners. 
Establishing the relationship gives teams time to prepare. 
The patient partner will need time to understand the project and to build trust in the sponsor. Equally, 
the sponsor will need time to build trust, as well as understand its capacity and interest to deliver.  
When deciding the best time to set up a sponsor–patient partnership in research, apply the general 
principle of ‘as early as possible’. Ideally, establish contacts a year before embarking on the design of 
the clinical trial protocol, especially if the patient partner side has no prior experience and needs to be 
trained. Equally, all industry contributors need to be trained on the value of patient engagement and 
how to engage patients9.
When initiating contact with selected patient partners, a brief description of the role of the patient 
partner to be involved in the project should be prepared in advance, outlining the expected level 
of contribution. This role description can later be co-developed and shaped further with input from 
patient partners in Step 2.
Initial contact before developing a pre-collaboration plan should facilitate confirming the patient 
partners interest, explain and agree on goals and expectations, establish transparency (for what 
will the research team use the information obtained through the partnership/collaboration, why it 
is important to obtain patient input, ensure the patient partner would make a good candidate for 
project participation, etc.) and establish a co-creation relationship.
Taking careful consideration of the patient partners to collaborate with and avoiding selection bias 
are both very important. Select patient partners who value independence and who can review and 
advise the sponsor’s strategy objectively. 
Approach a registered patient organization. While a ‘naive’ individual patient perspective may be 
beneficial at times, engaging individuals without ties to a patient organization may lead to input that 
is not representative of the patient community. 
Patient partner diversity is also important, including from a geographical perspective. The patient 
experience can vary from Western to Eastern Europe, for example, and choosing a single patient from 
Western Europe is likely to lead to some perspectives being left out. 
Depending on the context or in case of no existing patient organizations in the field of interest, patient 
pools or networks that are organized around public institutions may provide a good reference to 
patient experts to engage in research projects. For example, the European Patients Academy (EUPATI) 
provides a matchmaking service to connect with patient experts10.
9 Patient Engagement Training, an innovative learning program that will concretely help you start your patient engagement 
journey or take it to the next level. Available here: https://pemsuite.org/patient-engagement-training/
10 European Patients Academy (EUPATI, 2000 (https://collaborate.eupati.eu/)
  10  10
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Four levels of contribution, each increasing in complexity:  
1. Patients can provide insights into the disease burden, the patient pathway, patient needs and 
preferences for clinical trials/research methodology;
2. Patients can provide generic insights such as assessing if the clinical visit schedule is too heavy 
and whether there could be transportation issues;
3. Patients can provide input on study design, including inclusion/exclusion criteria and endpoints; 
are familiar with the design of a clinical trial protocol  and can co-create patient interview 
guides and plain-language summaries for clinical trial participants;
4. Patients have vocational backgrounds relevant to medicines development.Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaboration
  11  11
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Step 2
Building a partnership for optimal patient engagement Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
The objective of this step is to:
 ●Define the scope, expectations and project timelines for a mutually agreed and beneficial 
partnership. 
 ●Define the methods and formats for the patient engagement activities.
 ●Consider involving others in the partnership activities to understand patients’ perspectives and 
driving successful outcomes from patient engagement.
This step sets out the process for the successful initiation of a patient engagement partnership. The 
key principles of patient engagement can be openly discussed and further applied (see Annex 1 - PE 
Quality Guidance), including also practical considerations of the patients’ perspective and  preparing 
patients for an optimal  project kick-off.  
Building a partnership between patients and sponsors will help build the trust that is critical to 
successful collaborations in medicines research and development. Patient partners’ involvement 
should not simply be a ‘tick-box’ exercise for regulatory approval. The trust built in this step could 
potentially lead to a long-term relationship that can effectively support communication around the 
project itself, the recruitment and retention plan for a clinical trial, and dissemination of the study 
results. Long-term partnerships with the patient community can also have a positive impact on a 
company’s reputation, public trust in the company, and overall community willingness to partner.
2.1. Clarify the project plan and goals
Once mutual interest between patient partners and the sponsor has been established, further 
planning of activities and clarification of the goals of the collaboration for both partners need to            
be agreed. Figure 4.  Step 2 of the How-to Guide

  12  12
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
Sponsors may refer to the PARADIGM EUPATI industry guidance and suggested working practices11 or the 
National Health Council’s Rubric for Good Patient Engagement as practical tools to guide preparation 
and interactions when project planning with patient partners. 
In setting up a project plan and goals, partners should address the following:
 ●Use of the Patient Engagement Quality Guidance12 to help plan the project and engagement 
activities, collectively review the relevant considerations;.
 ○Discuss and agree on the shared purpose within the research project and the stakeholders to 
be involved to reach the common goals and objectives;
 ○Commit to transparent, respectful, and continuous communication during the project;
 ●Ensure all partners recognize and understand the value they contribute and understand each 
other well; patients are experts in their condition and sponsors have the knowledge and expertise 
of the clinical trial process. Both add value.
 ○Define the responsibilities of all contributors and identify respective leaders for collaboration 
and define accountability to avoid multiple sources interacting in an uncoordinated way;
 ○Identify if sponsors and patient partners need additional support or capacity building to 
properly engage and collaborate. This may include  training and education on clinical trials in 
general and, more specifically, on clinical trial protocols and their design. 
It will be helpful to define the following considerations from the outset of the collaboration:
 ●What impact will partners’ inputs have on the overall project? 
 ●What are the sponsors hoping to gain from patient engagement? 
 ●How will the greater patient community benefit from the collaboration?
 ●How will partners work together with their respective experience and knowledge?
The patient community needs to know how their input made a difference and how they 
influenced the decision-making, reporting, and dissemination process. Patient partners should 
also know when their input could not be considered and the reasons should be explained to 
them. Sponsors should be prepared to proactively provide feedback to patient partners. 
12 Access at: http://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/EUPATI/PARADIGM-Suggested-Working-Practices.pdf and at: https://
nationalhealthcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NHC_Patient_Engagement_Rubric.pdf
13 Access at: https://pemsuite.org/peqg/2.2. Define the project timelines
Long-term relationships between sponsors and patient partners are desirable to create strong 
collaborations for ongoing research. However, short-term collaborations are sometimes the only option. 
The duration of the collaboration should be defined and key milestones agreed in advance. Whatever 
the length of the relationship, patient partners should be involved as much as possible at every stage  
of the drug development process and the sponsor should manage their expectations throughout. When 
the project ends, the relationship between the sponsor and patient partner may continue  through 
ongoing communication. Create a communication plan and define the structure, content, governance, 
and duration in advance. 
  13  13
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
Patient partners
 ●Setting up partnerships might take time and resources from patient organizations in many 
aspects: identifying the right partners for projects, setting up processes for patients to be 
involved and defining contractual needs just to name a few. In addition, sponsors might be 
struggling with tight deadlines which in turn might translate into unrealistic timeline expectations 
towards patient partners and patient engagement activities.
 ●It is important for patient partners to understand that research might take time and resources 
and projects might extend beyond the original estimates. Whatever the case, concerns 
should be possible to voice at any time during the project; either to the sponsors or patient 
organizations involved.
Sponsors
 ●Ensure to have the necessary resources required to support patient engagement                        
activities - consider the people, time, and funding needed to engage with patient partners.
Share the project plan and timelines with the patient partners so they can prepare for the 
collaboration. Do not underestimate the amount of time needed for administrative aspects, 
such as agreeing on contracts, and compliance processes. Involve the people needed for 
these tasks early in the process to avoid delays where delays are inevitable, and ensure clear 
communication with the patient partners within the project. This will increase the likelihood that 
they will contribute valuable ideas and critical observations for the clinical trial protocol design.Considerations for resources and time required
2.3. Contracting considerations
The sponsor-patient partner relationship is often defined and governed by a legal agreement or 
contract. In some instances, an additional Confidentiality Agreement (CDA) is required if the topics 
covered in the patient engagement activities are commercially sensitive to the sponsor. Needless 
to say, all contractual arrangements must comply with the legal framework in the region or country 
concerned. 
Once the patient partners have been identified and the project scope, roles and responsibilities, 
are defined the contracting process can begin. The legal agreement will outline aspects such as 
compensation and reimbursement, among other things. 
Sponsors may use the checklist below as a guide and should also consider if patient partners 
may require legal support, should they need it. Any problems13 and anxiety experienced during this 
phase can be alleviated by an honest and straightforward conversation about the process and 
potential difficulties.
13 See Survey by WECAN. WECAN (2018) Guiding Principles on Reasonable Agreements between Patient Advocates and 
Pharmaceutical Companies. Available at: https://wecanadvocate.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Guiding-Principles_final-
document6.2_clean.pdf  
  14  14
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Checklist: Questions for sponsors to consider 
when setting up a contact between patient 
partners and sponsorsComments/Notes
Has my organization worked with this patient/
patient organization before?
If yes,
Have we previously had a contract in place for 
collaboration, can this speed up the contracting 
process?
If no,
Connect with the legal , compliance, data 
privacy teams to enquire about the time 
requirement to set up contracts and relay this 
information to patient partners
 »What is the time requirement to review 
contracts for the partners?
 »Are the contracts fit for this collaboration 
and understandable? Check the co-created 
guidelines and agreements
 »Are there considerations around 
confidentiality, and, if so, is a confidentiality 
agreement needed or can this be covered 
within the contract?Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
Resources: 
The use of co-created guides and agreements will also help to focus contracts on the essential 
elements and can support understanding and negotiating legal agreements. These include:
 ●Guiding Principles on Reasonable Agreements between Patient Advocates and Pharmaceutical 
Companies, developed by the Workgroup of European Cancer Patient Advocacy Networks 
(WECAN), Myeloma Patients Europe and PFMD
 ●Patient Engagement Agreements Explained for collaborations between the patient community 
and stakeholders in healthcare systems, developed by IMI PARADIGM
 ●Principles for Contracting between Patients/Patient Groups and Pharmaceutical Companies for 
Patient Engagement Activities, developed for use in the USA by the National Health Council 
  15  15
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
14 For more information: NHC. Patient Engagement Compensation and Contracting Toolbox. Available from: https://
nationalhealthcouncil.org/patient-engagement-compensation-and-contracting/ (For USA)
15 See section 8 on WeCAN. (2018) “Financial compensation and reimbursement of expenses” Available at: https://
wecanadvocate.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Guiding-Principles_final-document6.2_clean.pdf  Checklist: Questions for sponsors to consider 
when setting up a contact between patient 
partners and sponsorsComments/Notes
Is there internal guidance for reimbursing and 
compensating patient partners? 
(If no, refer to the National Health Council’s Patient 
Engagement Compensation and Contracting 
Toolbox14 and the Guiding Principles on Legal 
Agreements.15)
 »Discuss reimbursement and compensation 
with patient partners and the potential 
implications if they accept compensation 
(e.g., impact on benefits, taxation)
 »Discuss the potential costs for the patient 
partners and how they will be reimbursed 
(e.g., are they paid up front or for each time 
they travel?) 
 »Discuss with the patient partners the time 
and effort required to be involved in the 
project (e.g., preparation time, meetings, 
travel, independent work, reporting, and 
other communication as relevant)
Have the lead times and deadlines been defined 
and agreed with the patient partner(s)?
Have the roles and responsibilities and other 
rules of collaboration been defined with the 
patient partner(s)?
2.4. Managing expectations and other considerations
It is important that patients, carers, and patient organizations are aware that clinical research is 
usually a lengthy process. Frequently, the results of early clinical research mean that the next steps 
of clinical development, and ultimately the launch of a new medicine or health care solution, 
may not happen. It is equally important that sponsors are aware that engaging patient partners 
requires proper resources and time input.
  16  16
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
 ●Consider whether your patient partners would benefit from a basic introduction to or training 
in medicines research and development before the collaboration project begins. This might 
include typical timeframes for each phase, development of a protocol design and patient 
partner inclusion in a clinical development program. 
 ●Establish an understanding of where the clinical trial protocol fits into the overall development of 
a product, and how patients can have an impact.
 ○Even if the clinical trial does not progress to the next clinical stage, patients need to know 
that their involvement in the design was still important, and that all results generate useful 
insights that will help clinical research in the future. 
 ●Patient organizations should explore whether capacity building or an orientation meeting with 
sponsors would be useful for preparing patient partners for a meaningful collaboration. 
 ●Accommodate a wide range of views and ideas from all stakeholders involved. 
 ○Patient organizations may have their own view and that may or may not coincide with 
patient partners and other patient organizations. 
 ○No one can speak for all patients with a particular disease. Patient organizations need to 
make reasonable efforts to reflect a diversity of opinions.
 ●Consider global, multi-cultural feedback as views vary depending on region/language/customs 
in different areas.
 ●Identify if sponsor research teams need to be trained on the value of the patient engagement 
and how to engage patients16Considerations for managing expectations
2.5. Deciding on the methods and formats for sponsor–patient 
partner interactions
Sponsor–patient partner relationships are founded on trust and ongoing transparent dialogue. There 
are different ways to interact for generating relevant and meaningful insights. Selecting interaction 
methods and formats that will deliver outcomes based on the objectives of the patient engagement 
is important. Moreover, minimizing the burden on the patient community is crucial, as well as 
ensuring that their input is respected and acted upon.Put in place a predetermined plan with a clear communication plan to manage expectations if the 
medicine fails. Considering the potential psychological impact of this and maintaining trust among 
the stakeholders are crucial.Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
Agree meeting rules and set out a clear goal at the start of each meeting.
16 Patient Engagement Training, an innovative learning program that will concretely help you start your patient engagement 
journey or take it to the next level. Available here: https://pemsuite.org/patient-engagement-training/
  17  17
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
Interaction formats
Partners should frequently assess whether the interaction method and formats are the best way to 
achieve the project objectives.
Methods and approaches for patient engagement
There are several approaches to patient engagement that can be used to collect patient partner 
insights and inputs in the co-design and co-development of the clinical trial protocol. Stakeholders 
can serve on ad hoc working groups to prioritize unanswered research questions, co-develop and 
review the clinical trial protocol. They can also have more sustained involvement once the clinical trial 
begins, providing their input and guidance by serving on an advisory committee or a co-investigator. 
Much like the approaches, there is also variability with respect to level or intensity in which partners 
are engaged. Engagement often occurs along a continuum ranging from stakeholder input, to 
consultation, to collaboration or shared leadership. A selection of different methods and approaches 
for patient engagement are introduced in the figure on the next page17. 
This selection of approaches need not to be viewed as mutually exclusive. An organization with fully 
developed patient engagement capacity is likely to rely on a variety of approaches combined to 
design a clinical trial protocol collaboratively with patient partners. For example, a sponsor may 
establish a Patient Advisory Board (PAB) to oversee the entire development program within a 
disease area and may also attend Community Advisory Boards (CAB) for strategic input to the 
development program according to patient community priorities. 
Moreover, regular implementation of wider surveys informed by PAB and CAB members’ experiences 
and advice, in order to stay in touch with views of the patient population at large. Additionally, the 
sponsor may host focus groups or consult with a patient partner directly to tackle specific aspects of 
a clinical trial protocol in development.  
 ●How frequently will the team meet? Where? 
 ●How much time and effort does this require from patient partners in addition to the meetings?
 ●Are in-person meetings always necessary or are virtual meetings possible, and, if so, which 
platforms are used?
 ●Would communicating in English be a problem for some of the patient partners? If yes, how will it 
be managed? 
 ●What burden does participating in meetings place on patient partners? (e.g. with regards to their 
health, for their carers, or impact on professional and private life) 
 ●What costs for the patient partners are to be covered?
 ●Are the patient partner groups big enough that the meetings are not affected by last minute 
cancellations, but not too big that everyone has the opportunity to share their inputs?Checklist of practical considerations for patient engagement
17 For additional information please check the James Lind Priority setting partnerships guidance.
  18  18
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Example of engagement type18Description
Patient Advisory Boards / 
Community Advisory BoardsLive meeting. A single meeting or series of facilitated meetings to 
capture patient partners’ perspectives, experiences and advice. 
Interviews/Focus GroupsLive meeting. Provide deeper insight into patient partners’ priorities, 
preferences and motivations and allow for elaborated conversation. 
Surveys/QuestionnairesEngaging with patient partners in a live meeting or virtually via a 
series of questions/ratings to gain patient feedback.
Figure 5. Example of engagement types
For sponsors: 
Consult internal knowledge and secondary data sources focused on patients and insights from 
previous patient engagement activities prior to engaging with patient partners to avoid duplication of 
effort and to build on insights and gaps previously identified. 
The diverse approaches for involving patient partners in clinical trial protocol design vary, depending 
on the level of engagement. They range from gathering insights via surveys or consultation to shared 
leadership and partnership and can be used independently or simultaneously. 
For patient partners: 
When possible, do internal research on insights gathered in previous engagement activities with other 
sponsors  (or even the same sponsor) and share these insights in a transparent dialogue. 
18 Table elaborated from Transcelerate, Examples Methods of Engagement.       
Available at: https://www.transceleratebiopharmainc.com/ppet/select-patients-appropriate-engagement-method/  Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
2.6. Involving others in the partnership activities
Sponsors should consider which internal representatives need to be involved in or informed of 
engagement activities with patient partners and at what stage. This might include departments or 
functions such as: patient advocacy/engagement team, medical affairs, clinical operations, market 
access, regulatory affairs, health economics, psychometricians, epidemiologists, statisticians, legal 
and compliance teams.
 ●Clinical research teams: This includes relevant individuals in the sponsor organization that are 
working on the clinical development program or clinical trial. It is important to consider if the 
clinical research team understands and recognizes the benefits of incorporating the learning 
  19  19
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Building a partnership for 
optimal patient engagement
from patient engagement, as well as how to incorporate patient insights into the decision 
making. 
 ●Healthcare professionals (e.g. doctors, pharmacists, dentists, nurses):  This includes any 
trained health professional involved in the medical care of patients who may or may not be 
directly involved in research projects. Their role is to advise the sponsor team about clinical 
aspects of the condition, the current clinical practices including the aspects of patients 
management with a particular condition, feedback from patients to certain investigations and 
methods, and to share their experience in medicines development and public health policies. 
 ●Medicine and diagnostic solutions developers: These include any public or private organization 
involved in research, development, manufacturing, marketing and/or distribution of medicinal 
products and/or other health products (i.e., medical devices, diagnostics and digital 
solutions). Their main role is as the sponsor of research projects, including clinical trial protocol 
development responsibility, and, if required, training for patients on these specific matters.
 ●Contract research organizations and consultancy companies: These organizations provide 
services related to clinical studies. They provide support for the sponsors and may act on their 
behalf to establish collaboration with patient partners. These partners should be trained on 
Patient Engagement to ensure they have the right approach.
 ●Application builders, health literacy experts and digital experts: These experts may be in 
charge of the development of services for patients in clinical research and development projects 
when relevant for the final. 
  20  20
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Step 3
Patient Engagement in the Clinical Trial Protocol Design
The objective of this step is to:
 ●Gather information to strengthen study designs and optimize clinical trial procedures and 
execution, clinical endpoints, and data generation. 
 ●Ensure that the target populations see these as valuable and that they address their needs 
and preferences while also supporting subsequent regulatory and reimbursement discussions 
(if applicable). A well-designed protocol is co-developed with patient partners and takes into 
account the practicalities, logistics, unmet needs, safety, ethics, and data collection that add 
value and adequately capture meaningful endpoints and patient outcomes.20Step 3 focuses on the importance of reflecting patient partners’ input together with the sponsor in the 
design of a clinical trial protocol through co-creation principles. A clinical trial protocol is ‘a document 
that describes the objective(s), design, methodology, statistical considerations, and organization of a 
[clinical] trial. The protocol usually also gives the background and rationale for the trial.19
19 National Institute of Health (NIH). (n/a) NIA Glossary of Clinical Research Terms. Available at: https://www.nia.nih.gov/
research/dgcg/nia-glossary-clinical-research-terms
20 For more information, check the How-to Guide on Patient Engagement in the Development of a Clinical Outcome Assessment 
(COA) strategy: link available when How-to Guide will be finalized. 
21 For additional information on the methods for collecting patients’ insights please check the section Deciding on the formats 
for sponsor–patient partner interactionPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Figure 6. Step 3 of the How-to Guide
3.1. Collecting patient partners insights for Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Collecting patient partners’ insights via the most appropriate methods21 is crucial. Some sponsors 
may have no previous experience in working with patient partners. Involving patient partners with 
varying degrees of exposure to/involvement in clinical trials protocol development is important for 
gaining a diversity of perspectives that will help improve the clinical trial design. Also, involving patient 

  21  21
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
The following considerations specific to clinical trial participants should be discussed with the 
patient partners involved in the clinical trial protocol design to ensure it is implemented optimally: 
 ●Are we addressing an unmet need with this research?
 ●Are the inclusion and exclusion criteria appropriate? Are we excluding certain populations, for 
safety, for instance? 
 ●Have we included Patient Reported Outcome Measures? If so, are they appropriately timed and/
or appropriately chosen?
 ●Are there any geographic, cultural, age, gender, race, language, socio-economic status specific 
considerations that we need to address when we identify participants for the clinical trial?
 ●Have we considered all possible clinical trial sites, or can we consider new sites? Depending on 
the scope of the study (international, regional, country-specific), the specific considerations may 
be tailored and adapted with the support of the patient partners. 
 ●Are there specific considerations that may impact the clinical trial participants (e.g., drug 
packaging or the use of (unfamiliar) devices for administration)? 
 ●Are there specific considerations that may impact a clinical trial participants’ life (e.g., frequent 
travel to hospital, hospital stays, privacy impacts)?
 ●Will the clinical trial include any invasive procedures? Could these have a negative affect on 
willingness to participate? 
 ●Are there special considerations where children or vulnerable populations are involved?
 ●Is the therapeutic area one that may provoke sensitivities? 
 ●If the study participants will be using a new digital tool (e.g., smartwatch, tablet, smartphone, 
etc.), are there practical implications (e.g., is training needed)? For Sponsors and Patient Partners
22 Soekhai, V. et al, (2018) Discrete Choice Experiments in Health Economics: Past, Present and Future. PharmacoEconomics, 37, 
(201–226). Available at: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s40273-018-0734-2Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
partners who have never taken part in a clinical trial before can be insightful. Current approaches for 
collecting patient feedback may vary; however, ‘translating’ those insights back to the study sponsor 
and research team can still be challenging. 
To fully integrate patient insights into the protocol design, attention is needed on how those insights 
are communicated so they can be actioned for a patient-centric trial design. The barriers sponsors 
face in collecting patient insights need to be overcome for this information to have a meaningful 
impact on the protocol and overall study design. 
This includes not only support from the internal organization but also an understanding of timelines 
and any need for additional research to identify practical methods that support how patient insights 
on the protocol can have a positive impact on the trial across all stakeholders. 
Such methods are increasingly being used to support other healthcare decision making, including 
predicting patient update of treatments.22
  22  22
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
 ●Could timing/volume of procedures in a clinical study have negative practical implications for 
clinical trial participants or disrupt their quality of life? If so, can the schedule and/or operational 
set-up of the clinical trial be redesigned to address this23?
 ●Will there be lay language materials (e.g., brochures, booklets, videos, etc.) to help clinical trial 
participants understand the clinical trial and the Informed Consent documents?
 ●Will the sponsor implement electronic Informed Consent for the clinical trial (e.g., eConsent or 
ePRO) and are there any special considerations needed?
 ●Is there a clear commitment from the sponsor to sharie the study results in an understandable 
format (leaflets, brochures, ad hoc communication at conferences) and in plain language?
 ●How will the sponsor share study progress in terms of enrollment of clinical trial participants, 
active clinical trial sites, and timelines?
23 Please find more resources in the TransCelerate Patient Protocol Engagement Toolkit. Available at: https://www.
transceleratebiopharmainc.com/ppet/planning-for-patient-engagement/
24 NIH-FDA. Clinical Trial Protocol Template v0.1 20160205. Available at: https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/
Protocol_Template_05Feb2016_508.pdfAdditional considerations
Planning and assuring a timely outcome so the findings collected from patient partners can be 
embedded before the protocol is finalized. In this planning phase, linking in parallel to the collection of 
site feedback would be useful.
Managing expectations: As clinical trial protocols are based on templates aligned with legal and 
regulatory requirements, there will be some aspects that cannot be changed significantly based on 
the input from the patient partners. To manage expectations, sponsors should be transparent about 
these instances from the outset and as part of the feedback and follow-up. 
Manage conflicts of interest: Patient partners providing input in the clinical trial design might also be 
interested in and eligible to take part in that clinical trial later on. Consider how to avoid any potential 
conflicts of interest around this from the outset (e.g., by keeping patient partners anonymous or 
communicating with patient partners indirectly via a patient organization).Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
3.2 Key questions and considerations for the development of a clinical 
trial protocol with patient partners 
Patient partners can be engaged to develop a clinical trial protocol from the start, or they may be 
asked to review a clinical trial protocol that has already been drafted. In either case, the sponsor will 
need to ensure that the patient partner understands the context of the clinical development plans 
relevant to the clinical trial at hand. 
Patient engagement in clinical trial protocol design should allow for insights to be implemented; 
therefore, early engagement with patient partners and outlining the timelines are critical. Table 1 
outlines the typical sections of a clinical trial protocol, adapted from a standard template24.
  23  23
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Objectives and 
purposeThis section of the protocol 
provides a detailed 
description of the primary 
(and secondary) objectives 
of the study. The objective 
is based on the scientific 
questions to be answered 
and the reason for 
performing the clinical trial. ●Why is there a need for the study? What, if any, is the 
current standard of treatment?
 ●Do the study objectives address an area of unmet 
need?
 ●What is important to the patient in the treatment/
maintenance of their condition? 
 ●What would a patient (or carer) hope to get out of 
study participation?
 ●Is it a novel treatment? 
 ●What would the patient like to see a drug/device 
bring to them to make living with their disease 
easier?
 ●What is meaningful for the patient for treatment/
maintenance of their condition?
Study design 
and endpointsThe design of the study 
(e.g., type of study, phase, 
single, multicenter or 
decentralized) and the 
study primary, secondary 
(and exploratory) 
endpoint(s) should be 
drawn up based on the 
study objective(s). Overall Study Design
 ●Is the study design appropriate?
 ●Is there a need for a ‘study partner’ (carer or family 
member)? If so, is their role and responsibility during 
visits explained clearly?
 ●What changes to the design could be implemented 
to minimize the burden on the patient participant? 
Investigational product/placebo/standard care
 ●Does the clinical trial have a placebo? Does the 
trial have different randomization strata? If so, what 
considerations are needed for explaining these to 
the clinical trial participant? 
 ●Is the use of the comparator treatment or placebo 
justified? 
 ●Assuming this is a blinded clinical trial, it is 
Important that patients do not unintentionally 
unblind it. Sharing study-specific information on 
social media is probably not advisable. Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
It provides a series of questions and considerations relevant to each section of the clinical trial 
protocol that can be discussed and designed with patient partners. 
This table does not provide an exhaustive list of all aspects to be addressed in designing the clinical 
trial protocol; however, it does provide a starting point for sponsors and patient partners to help take 
patient engagement into account in clinical trial protocol design. 
  24  24
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Study design 
and endpointsStudy Endpoints
 ●Is the study endpoint meaningful to the patient 
population? 
 ●Which study outcomes are most important to the 
patient? Do the primary/secondary endpoints in the 
protocol map to this? 
 ●How important are patient-relevant endpoints? Are 
the current measurement approaches appropriate? 
Or is there a lack of patient-relevant endpoints? 
 ●What patient-reported outcomes or other patient 
experience measures are appropriate?
 ●Are the patient-reported measures captured in a 
practical way (i.e. on paper, tablet, etc.)? 
 ●Will any study endpoints be related to patient-
reported outcomes data?
Additional measures
 ●Are there requirements in the study that may add 
additional burden? (e.g., colon prep agents)
Study 
enrollment 
and 
withdrawalThis section of the protocol 
encompasses the study 
population, the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria, 
and the recruitment and 
retention approaches 
of the study, and how 
participants may withdraw 
or be discontinued from the 
study.Inclusion/Exclusion criteria
 ●Is the study population appropriate (also in terms of 
diversity: gender, age, sex, ethnicity)?
 ●Do the inclusion/exclusion criteria present a barrier 
to recruitment?
Patient Screening/Recruitment
 ●Are the patient-facing documents, such as 
recruitment materials and Informed Consent 
Forms (ICF), clearly written and understandable for 
patients?
 ●Are the benefits and risks clarified in the ICF? If not, 
have the potential benefits and risks of participation 
been identified for the patient? And for their 
caregivers?
 ●Are support services offered during the screening 
process?
 ●What happens if, following screening, a potential 
clinical trial participant is not eligible?Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
  25  25
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Study 
enrollment 
and 
withdrawalThis section of the protocol 
encompasses the study 
population, the inclusion 
and exclusion criteria, 
and the recruitment and 
retention approaches 
of the study, and how 
participants may withdraw 
or be discontinued from the 
study. ●What kind of support services would be helpful when 
participating in the clinical study? 
 ●What type of information would patients like to 
receive as part of a clinical trial, and from whom? 
(e.g., peer, doctor, patient organization, family 
member)
 ●What value does the patient see from the clinical 
trial for them and other patients with the condition?
 ●Is there a recruitment strategy and recruitment tools 
for patients, sites, clinics?
Participant withdrawal
 ●Are the procedures for withdrawing from the study 
clearly communicated?
 ●How will patients be appropriately followed up if they 
discontinue the study?
Patient Remuneration
 ●Are any clinical trial participation costs reimbursed? 
And are their other financial or non-financial 
incentives for participation (e.g., vouchers, medical 
or technological devices, etc.)?
 ●How will the burden on the clinical trial participant 
and carers be alleviated (e.g., clinical assessment 
and travel, meals, accommodation reimbursement, 
child care, if applicable)?
Management of care
 ●How will the study impact the patients’ current care?
 ●What are the other conditions of participation?
 ●When will the study begin, and how long will it last?
After the trial
 ●What are the procedures when a clinical trial 
participant needs to leave the study (e.g., 
withdrawal or termination), and how will they be 
followed-up?
 ●What will happen from the clinical trial participants 
perspective when the study ends?
 ●Will the study drug be provided after the trial? If so, 
for how long? Is there an added cost or how?
 ●What happens to the patient data during the study 
or when the clinical trial is completed/discontinued?
  26  26
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Study 
enrollment 
and 
withdrawalOther
 ●What study assurance is needed in case of medical 
problems due to the study? Are the risks mentioned 
and explained to the study participants?
 ●What are the barriers and motivators to 
participating in a particular study?
Study agent  
(if applicable)The study agent is the 
intervention being studied 
(e.g., drug, device). The 
dosing and administration 
schedule should be 
described (e.g., dose, time 
of day and interval, route of 
administration) and should 
include conditions for dose 
adjustments/modifications/
delays and the duration of 
the therapy.Dosing
 ●What is the daily dose?
 ●How might participants feel about dose escalations 
or scheduling changes?
 ●How will possible dose adjustments/delays affect 
the patient?
Mode of Administration
 ●How will the study agent be delivered? (e.g., oral, 
intravenous, etc.)
 ●Are there practical considerations around the 
administration (e.g., length of visits, suitable 
formulation for study population)?
Treatment duration
 ●What is the expected duration of treatment?
Other relevant questions
 ●How does the treatment differ from the current (if 
any) standard of treatment?
 ●Is there a process for patients to ask questions about 
the agent?
 ●Are any new technologies being used in the study? 
And are there related practical considerations?
Study 
procedures 
and schedule 
(if applicable)Procedures and scheduling 
for the collection of data 
(medical history, height, 
weight, BMI , sex, age, 
demographic group, health 
status of participants), 
including clinical, laboratory 
and imaging results, and 
questionnaires, should be 
defined. ●What does taking part mean to the patients (‘What’s 
going to happen to me and what impact will it have 
on my life?’)?
 ●Is the schedule of events feasible in terms of 
screening, enrollment/baseline, and follow-ups?
 ●Is the visit schedule feasible (e.g., frequency of visits, 
length of visits, at-home requirements)? 
  27  27
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Study 
procedures 
and schedule 
(if applicable) ●What does taking part mean to the patients 
(‘What’s going to happen to me and what impact 
will it have on my life?’)?
 ●Is the schedule of events feasible in terms of 
screening, enrollment/baseline, and follow-ups?
 ●Is the visit schedule feasible (e.g., frequency of visits, 
length of visits, at-home requirements)? 
 ●Is the order of the tests and procedures during visits 
realistic for patients (e.g., urine testing isn’t the first 
test if people have a long distance to drive to the 
site or have a bladder control issue and cannot hold 
it for their travel distance)?
 ●Are the tests and procedures included needed 
to answer the study objectives? Or are they more 
‘exploratory’ in nature?
 ●Is the frequency of the tests and procedures 
realistic? (e.g., minimize the number of lumbar 
punctures, propose optional sub-groups for specific 
tests and procedures)
 ●Are the geographical locations and number of sites 
enrolling participants appropriate?
 ●What are the considerations when choosing study 
sites, testing, accessibility, and diversity of the 
patient population?
 ●How many questionnaires will participants need to 
complete at each visit?
 ●How and when will patients receive their test 
results?
 ●Would alternatives to study visits (nurse home 
visits or telemedicine) would improve patient 
participation?
 ●How long are patients willing to spend on answering 
questionnaires (e.g., are there multiple PROMs/
questionnaires each visit)? 
 ●Does the patient need to attend the clinic, or can 
they complete the questionnaires at home?
 ●How are you going to gather patient feedback, 
specifically on patient-reported outcome 
questionnaires (e.g., clarity of language, 
comprehension, appropriateness of questions
  28  28
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
Clinical trial 
protocol 
sectionWhat is addressed in the 
section of the protocol?Questions and considerations that are relevant to 
clinical trial participants and/or aspects where patient 
partners can provide protocol advice
Study 
procedures 
and schedule 
(if applicable)asked) and on devices used (e.g., whether the use 
of a hand-held device is easy or difficult)?
 ●Is there a questionnaire for the caregiver? (if yes, 
the same questions as above would be applicable)
Assessment of 
safetyThis section of the protocol 
outlines the assessments 
and procedures related to 
risks and safety, and the 
steps that will be taken to 
ensure the safety of clinical 
trial participants and 
minimize risk.  ●What information is provided to clinical trial 
participants to help them understand possible side 
effects?
 ●How will adverse events be classified and reported?
 ●Are there any risks to individuals other than the 
clinical trial participants (e.g., carers or close 
contacts)?
 ●Is the process for reporting side effects clear for 
patients? 
 ●How will the patient contact the study coordinator 
throughout the study with concerns, worries, or side 
effects, including during evenings and at weekends?
Ethics Clinical trials of human 
participants must conform 
to ethical standards. 
This section of the 
protocol outlines the 
ethical considerations, 
including, among many 
considerations, information 
on the Informed Consent 
procedures and participant 
and data confidentiality.  ●What are the Informed Consent procedures?
 ●Are there supplemental materials available to help 
clinical trial participants (and carers) understand 
the study and the Informed Consent Form(s)?
 ●What considerations are needed around Informed 
Consent or assent in paediatrics or those who 
cannot consent for themselves?
 ●Will any of the data or samples collected in the 
clinical trial be used elsewhere?
 ●Will an independent review board approve the study 
protocol?
Data handling 
and recording 
keepingThis section of the protocol 
outlines the data handling 
and record-keeping for the 
clinical trial, including study 
records retention. ●Who is responsible for the collection and 
management of the clinical trial participants’ data? 
For how long will it be retained?
 ●Will clinical trial participants be able to request their 
data at a later date?
 ●Are the personal data used in accordance with GDPR 
(in Europe)?
  29  29
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
3.3 Analysis of patient partner insights
The analysis of patient partner insights will serve the adaptation/amendment of the clinical trial 
protocol before the start of the clinical trial recruitment. Patient partners’ inputs are essential in 
determining what is important and the importance of specific aspects for the patient population, 
which are often then analyzed qualitatively. 
In addition to sharing their insights, patient partners can play an integral role in developing the 
operational plan as a research partner. Refining the clinical trial design based on patient partner 
input means the research will cover aspects valued by the patient population. Doing so will likely 
have a positive effect on recruitment speed and retention of clinical trial participants. 
 ●Create a ‘knowledge library’ of patient partners’ insights, with their consent, so learnings are shared 
more broadly and can inform work on future clinical trials.
 ●Summarize storage of patient insights for regulatory filing. 
 ●Communicate with patient partners throughout the study duration; this may include sharing press 
releases, clinical trial updates and published data, including any reasons for study discontinuation.
 ●Inform patient partners if their input to a single clinical trial protocol is applied to other related 
clinical trials or clinical development programs. Good practices for Sponsors:Patient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol Design
  30  30
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Step 4
Feedback and follow-up
The objective of this step is to:
 ●Provide guidance on ways to continue the collaboration after the formal ending of the initial 
project. The sponsor and patient partners should be considered equal partners with meaningful 
follow-up emphasizing the value placed on the inputs and relationship. Furthermore, an ethical 
rationale goes with involving and informing the populations that are providing feedback.
Once the clinical trial protocol has been completed, sponsors should share information with patient 
partners on the specific areas where inputs were incorporated and how they influenced the clinical 
trial protocol or other study elements. 
The sponsor should equally explain to patient partners, as appropriate, why certain insights could not 
be incorporated. Sponsors should also be clear about timelines for the clinical trial and when they 
expect it to be complete and the results published.Step 4 encompasses reasons for the sponsor to stay in touch with patient partners. It is an important 
step for the future of patient-centric clinical trials. Maintaining the relationship beyond the project 
enhances the likelihood of future collaborations and increases the efficiency of patient engagement 
activities, which will help increase their impact.
Patient partners can continue to be engaged and informed once a clinical trial is underway. Examples 
of continued engagement and information sharing can include:
 ●Informing the patient partners on the progress of the clinical trial, including recruitment, 
completion and/or publicationsFeedback and follow-up
Figure 7. Step 4 of the How-to Guide

  31  31
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
 ●Asking patient partners to contribute to the Plain Language Summary25 of the clinical trial
 ●Including patient partners in the process of manuscript/abstract writing and/or review.
Advantages of long-term patient engagement
There are many advantages to keeping the sponsor–patient partners collaboration going. The 
sponsor can reflect on past projects and support patient partners to disseminate clinical trial 
outcomes to the wider community, highlighting how their contribution made a difference to the 
outcomes. Opportunities to circulate results via publications or conferences should be shared with 
the contributing patient partners as they can help to get the right messages to the relevant patient 
communities. 
Plan with the patient partners how best to keep in contact after the project. See whether a debrief 
is possible/practical after a certain period of time or specific milestones are achieved to reflect on 
and assess the impact of the collaboration. This would also be an ideal opportunity to gauge how             
far-reaching the benefits of the partnership have been and should be outlined in the contract created 
at the beginning of the partnership.
25 More information available on the Plain language summaries (PLS)of peer-reviewed publications and conference 
presentations: practical ‘How-To’ Guide for multi-stakeholder co-creation at this link: https://pemsuite.org/How-to-Guides/
WG5.pdfFeedback and follow-up
  32  32
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Considerations for Patient Engagement
Below you can find Considerations for quality PE for each step of this How-to Guide on PE in Clinical 
Trial Protocol Design. Access the Annex 1 for more considerations on the PEQG and definitions of the 
7 criteria. The Patient Engagement Quality Guidance (PEQG) tool26 provides a useful discussion guide 
and partnership-setting framework to help set up the new partnership and keep it on track. Considerations for Patient Engagement
Considerations for Step 1:
Preparations for setting up partnership and collaboration
In the preparation of the partnership between patients and sponsors it can be valuable to enable 
stakeholders to exchange views openly, in order to understand the scope and objectives of the future 
collaborations, acknowledging that some of their objectives may differ. 
All parties concerned should also have a shared written description of the common goals of the 
project (Criterion 1: Shared Purpose).
26 Find here more information on the Patient Engagement Quality Guidance tool.
Figure 8.  The PEQG tool has 7 quality criteria
  33  33
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Consideration for Patient Engagement
Considerations for Step 2:
Building a partnership for optimal patient engagement
Considerations for Step 3:
PE in Clinical Trial Protocol designDuring this phase, roles and responsibilities should be acknowledged by all parties ( Criterion 4: 
Roles and Responsibilities), described in a written format, addressing that all aspects of the project 
need to be revisited regularly. Capacity for engagement (Criterion 5: Capacity and Capabilities 
for engagement) refers to the critical point of having the relevant and dedicated resources from all 
stakeholders. 
This includes for example foreseeing and defining a main point of contact for the patients involved 
in the projects for the entire duration of the established partnership. It also entails having realistically 
estimated and communicated the patient partners’ time availability for a qualitative contribution. In 
the context of design of the partnership for the clinical protocol design, developing the capabilities for 
all stakeholders (Criterion 5) to enable meaningful engagement is critical. 
In fact, the success of the PE partnership is based on a sufficient level of knowledge, access to 
the right expertise, and training resources (e.g. material and dedicated support functions) for all 
stakeholders (patients and sponsors). Capability requirements may vary depending on the project 
nature and complexity, and should be clearly addressed. It requires a strong assessment process 
during the establishment of the partnership.
During the collection of patients’ insights, the good conditions to allow openness to and inclusion of 
individuals and communities without discrimination is critical (Criterion 2: Respect and accessibility). 
Make sure that people involved are reflecting the needs and limitations of the patient population 
when developing the clinical protocol, and the interests of those who may benefit from being enrolled 
in the clinical trial. Consider diversity in demographics, cultural, health conditions and other relevant 
criteria for inclusion. 
When selecting patient partners, attention will be given to awareness of the diversity and expertise 
required to achieve a visible representative voice and provide tangible positive benefits on the future 
design of the protocol. It is recommended to have one accountable person from the sponsor for 
patient interactions. While there will be several people interacting, there should be one delegate, who 
has the overview and central accountability (Criterion 3: Representativeness of Stakeholders).
A transparent and open communication process must be established at the beginning of the 
collaboration with the patient partners and will continue throughout the entire lifecycle of clinical trial 
included in the steps of data results collection, dissemination and external communication. 
Transparent means to include changes to study design, outcomes, rationale for choices, etc. 
Confidentiality agreement needed to protect information shared by both parties, sponsor and patient 
(Criterion  6: Transparency in Communication and Documentation).
  34  34
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Consideration for Patient Engagement
Considerations for Step 4:
Feedback and Follow-up
The follow-up actions regarding the analysis of the insights need a proactive communication process 
with the patient partners that must be open, honest and complete. 
For any insights collected from the patient partners that cannot be taken into consideration in 
the development of the protocol there is a need to install a systematic feedback mechanism 
with clear explanations provided by the sponsor (Criterion 6: Transparency in Communication 
and Documentation). When possible, the relationships between the patient partners involved 
and sponsors of the clinical trial will continue beyond the project (Criterion 7: Continuity and 
sustainability) to create the basis of a long-term partnership.
  35  35
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Acknowledgements
This How-to guide was co-developed with a large community of stakeholders (more than 35 
individuals from 26 organizations), representing patient organizations, pharmaceutical industry, 
academics, researchers and external experts. 
Special thanks to the Core team for drafting, editing, reviewing and maintaining momentum to deliver 
the guide, present it on multiple occasions and disseminate it even further than their own internal 
networks. We would like to also acknowledge all contributors* of this working group and everyone 
who reviewed the multiple iterations of this guide during 2019 and 2020. Your contribution made a 
difference and resulted in the How-to Guide in your hands today.
Core team authors (in alphabetical order)
Adit Bassi GenerationR Liverpool YPAG Member
Rob Camp EURORDIS
Thierry Escudier Pierre Fabre
Marta Garcia Servier
Angi Gillen Gilead
Ronella Grootens Dutch Clinical Research Foundation
Jennifer PrestonUniversity of Liverpool: GenerationR Liverpool YPAG/
eYPAGnet
Janine Ann Reed Retired nurse/ NKF and Alport Syndrome Foundation
Jeanette Ryan GSK
Kerry Rosenfeld SolidBio
Duane Sunwold Patient, patient advocate/ NKF
Severine Wollenschneider Roche
Olga Zvonareva Maastricht UniversityAcknowledgments
* Elena Cardenal (Dravet Syndrome Foundation), Nigel Cook (Novartis), Clint Crowell (Gilead), Ashley Duenas (Evidera), Lisa 
D’Amato (Gilead), Jucinda Fenn-Hodson (Roche), Pauline Frank (Novartis), David Haerry, Tony Hoos, Arti Jassal Konopka 
(Incyte), Annekatrin Krause (Novartis), Tamika Lang (MPE), Susanna Leto di Priolo (Marakoi), Kevin Marsh (Evidera), Tomohide 
Mishiba (Novartis), Veronica van Nederveen (Dutch Clinical Research Foundation), Gerrit Oostenveld (Dutch Clinical Research 
Foundation), Lisa Phelan (Gilead), Berkeley Philips (Pfizer), Lea Proulx (Roche), Thomas Schindler (Boehringer-Ingelheim), Carole 
Scrafton (FibroFlutters), Janette Turner (Gilead), Kay Warner (GSK), Tracy Wild Dachenhausen (Gilead), Jamie Zagorski (Gilead).
  36  36
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Acknowledgments

  37  37
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
The Patient Engagement Quality Guidance (PEQG27) was 
co-created to help all stakeholders set up partnerships 
and projects collaboratively. 
Criteria 1 : Shared purpose 
This refers to the project’s aims and outcomes that all 
stakeholders taking part should agree on before starting 
the project. Consider putting in place processes to 
help facilitate discussions between all stakeholders to 
identify each other’s values, expectations and objectives, 
and review and discuss priorities in the planning of the 
project. It can be valuable to enable stakeholders to 
exchange views openly to understand the scope and 
objectives of the project, acknowledging that some of 
their objectives may differ. All parties concerned should 
also have a shared written description of the common 
goals of the project.
Criteria 2: Respect and accessibility
This refers to (1) respecting each other, and respectful interactions within the project to be established 
among partners, and (2) openness to and inclusion of individuals and communities (to the project) 
without discrimination. Considerations to ensure good conditions to implement the project should be 
made from the beginning. For example: 
 ●simplification of wording
 ●budget and payment considerations
 ●cultural adaptations to procedures
 ●practicalities such as meeting timing, location and format
 ●accessibility of project materials
 ●written co-developed rules of conduct 
Accessibility to participate may be facilitated by enabling multiple ways to involve stakeholders who 
could benefit from and/ or contribute to the project. For example, patients with cognitive impairment 
might need more time to go through project material, or need printed versions rather than electronic 
documents or PDFs for easier reading.Annex 1
Patient Engagement Quality criteria definitions 
27 PFMD. (2018) Patient Engagement Quality Guidance Tool. Patient Focused Medicines Development. Available at: https://
pemsuite.org/peqg/Patient Engagement Quality criteria definitions
  38  38
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Criteria 3: Representativeness of stakeholders 
This refers to the mix of people you involve, which should reflect the needs of the project, and the 
interests of those who may benefit from project outputs (for example, target population). Consider 
diversity in expertise, experience, demographics, and other relevant criteria for inclusion. When 
selecting Patient Engagement stakeholders, patients, attention will be given to awareness of the 
diversity required to achieve visible representative voice.
Criteria 4: Roles and responsibilities 
This refers to the need for clearly agreed, and ideally co-created roles and responsibilities, in writing, 
addressing that all aspects of project needs will be established upfront and revisited regularly
Criteria 5 : Capacity and capability for engagement
This refers to (1) capacity as having relevant and dedicated resources from all stakeholders (for 
example, providing a dedicated point of contact by the sponsor and having allocated sufficient 
time by all stakeholders to allow genuine engagement); and (2) capabilities for all stakeholders 
to enable meaningful engagement (for example, the level of knowledge, expertise and training 
stakeholders might need to deliver Patient Engagement activities throughout the project). Consider 
supporting stakeholders to build the required capacity and capabilities for this project in different 
forms of training both with sponsor organizations and with each stakeholder (for example, helping to 
understand the context, processes, relevant terminology etc.). Both capacity and capability building 
are intended to facilitate participation and lower barriers to collaborate.
Stakeholders can be given access to learning resources and given dedicated support (if needed).
Capability needs may vary depending on the project needs, but also e.g. personal circumstances of 
Patient Engagement representatives.
Criteria 6: Transparency in communication and documentation 
This refers to the establishment of a communication plan and ongoing project documentation 
that can be shared with stakeholders. Communication among stakeholders must be open, honest 
and complete. In addition, adequate up-to-date documentation must facilitate communication 
with all stakeholders throughout the project. Consider proactively and openly sharing progress 
updates throughout the project externally. In addition, communicating outcomes of the project to all 
stakeholders and how their contribution was of value to the success of the project is critical.
Criteria 7: Continuity and sustainability 
This refers to the smooth progression of the project, as well as efforts to maintain ongoing 
relationships with stakeholders. Consideration should be given for the role of stakeholders beyond 
a single project. When starting the project, consider including in your project plan the actions 
needed for maintaining expected flow of the project from beginning to end. Create a plan to nurture 
relationships with your partners and stakeholders involved during the project, and when needed and 
requested, beyond the project as well. For all stakeholders successful planning and personal and 
organizational resilience should be anticipated.ANNEX 1 | PE Quality criteria definitions 
  39  39
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
FDA
FDA-NIH Biomarker Working Group. BEST (Biomarkers, EndpointS, and other Tools) Resource [Internet]. 
Silver Spring (MD): Food and Drug Administration (US); 2016-. Glossary. 2016 Jan 28 [Updated 2020 Aug 4].
Available at: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/NBK338448/
PCORI
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). (2018). The value of Engagement.
Available at: https://www.pcori.org/engagement/value-engagement
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). (2015). Financial Compensation of Patients, 
Caregivers, and Patient/Caregiver Organizations Engaged in PCORI-Funded Research as Engaged 
Research Partners.
Available at: https://www.pcori.org/sites/default/files/PCORI-Compensation-Framework-for-Engaged-
Research-Partners.pdf
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). (n.a.). Research Fundamentals: Preparing You  
to Successfully Contribute to Research.
Available at: https://www.pcori.org/engagement/research-fundamentals
Patient-Centered Outcomes Research Institute (PCORI). (n.a.). Engagement Resources.
Available at: https://www.pcori.org/engagement/engagement-resources
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI)
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI). (2019). CTTI Launches New Tools to Help Identify High  
Value Patient Engagement Opportunities.
Available at: https://www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/news/ctti-launches-new-tool-help-identify-high-value-
patient-engagement-opportunities
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI). (2019). Patient Group Organizational Expertise and      
Assets Evaluation Tool.
Available at: https://www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/sites/www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/files/8-tool_1-pg_
evaluation_tool-09jul2019.pdf
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI). (2015). CTTI Recommendations: Effective Engagement   
with Patient Groups Around Clinical Trials.
Available at: https://www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/files/pgctrecs.pdfReferences
Guidance DocumentsReferences
  40  40
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Clinical Trials Transformation Initiative (CTTI). (2018). Engage Early, Engage Often. Realizing the Value of 
Effective Patient Group Engagement. 
Available at: https://www.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/projects/patient-groups-clinical-trials
CTTI. Prioritization Tool for Sponsors and Patient Groups. 
Available at: https://prioritizationtool.ctti-clinicaltrials.org/
TransCelerate
TransCelerate. (2020) Clinical Template Suite. 
Available at: https://www.transceleratebiopharmainc.com/initiatives/clinical-content-reuse/#clinical-
template-suite
TransCelerate. Patient Protocol Engagement Toolkit. 
Available at: https://www.transceleratebiopharmainc.com/ppet/planning-for-patient-engagement/ 
EUPATI
EUPATI. (2013). Guidance for Patient Involvement in Industry-led Medicines R&D.  
Available at: https://toolbox.eupati.eu/wp-content/uploads/sites/4/2020/07/EUPATI-Guidance-for-
patient-involvement-in-industry-led-medicines-RD-EN-v1.pdf
The Professional Society for Health Economics and Outcomes Research (ISPOR)
Harrington, R. L., Hanna, M. L., Oehrlein, E. M., et al. (2020). Defining Patient Engagement in Research: 
Results of a Systematic Review and Analysis: Report of the ISPOR Patient-Centered Special Interest 
Group. Value Health; 23(6): 677–688. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jval.2020.01.019 
PARADIGM
PARADIGM. (2020) Recommendations on the required capabilities for patient engagement.  
Available at: https://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/pe-capabilities.pdf
PARADIGM. (2020). Guidance to Patients and Engaging Stakeholders. 
Available at: https://imi-paradigm.eu/petoolbox/conflict-of-interest/
PARADIGM. (2020). Raising Awareness on Managing Competing Interests in a Multi-stakeholder 
Environment: Guidance to Patients and Engaging Stakeholders. 
Available at: https://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/COI-Guidance-tools.pdf
PARADIGM. (2020). Patient Engagement Agreements Explained for Collaborations between the Patient 
Community and Stakeholders in Healthcare Systems. 
Available at: http://imi-paradigm.eu/petoolbox/contract-templates/ References
  41  41
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
PARADIGM. (2020). Patient Engagement in Medicines Development: Recommendations on How to 
Find the Right Match for the Right Patient Engagement Activity. 
Available at: https://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/identification-of-patient-representatives.pdf 
PARADIGM. (2020). Recommendations on the Required Capabilities for Patient Engagement. 
Available at: https://imi-paradigm.eu/PEtoolbox/pe-capabilities.pdf
Working Group of the European Cancer patient Advocacy Network (WECAN)
WECAN (2018) Guiding Principles on Reasonable Agreements between Patient Advocates and 
Pharmaceutical Companies. 
Available at: https://wecanadvocate.eu/wp-content/uploads/2019/03/Guiding-Principles_final-
document6.2_clean.pdf 
NIH - FDA
NIH-FDA. Clinical Trial Protocol Template v0.1 20160205. 
Available at: https://osp.od.nih.gov/wp-content/uploads/2014/01/Protocol_
Template_05Feb2016_508.pdf 
NHC
NHC. Patient Engagement Fair-Market Value Calculator. 
Available from: https://nationalhealthcouncil.org/fair-market-value-calculator/
NHC & Genetic Alliance. (2017). Patient-Focused Drug Development – Recommended Language for 
Use in Guidance Document Development. 
Available at: https://nationalhealthcouncil.org/wp-content/uploads/2019/12/NHC-GA%20Feb2017.pdf
PFMD
PFMD. (2020) Reasonable agreements between patient advocates and pharmaceutical companies.  
Available at: https://patientfocusedmedicine.org/reasonable-legal-agreements/ 
PFMD. (2020) Patient Engagement Quality Guidance Tool. Patient Focused Medicines Development.
Available at: https://pemsuite.org/peqg/References
  42  42
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
This glossary represents the words used in this How-to Guide and intends to provide more clarification 
or explanation to the terminology used. The explanations should by no means be taken as the sole 
meaning as context might influence the understanding of these terms. The list at the end references 
the resources that were used to create this glossary.Glossary of terms
Terminology Explanation
A
Adverse 
effects/eventsAny untoward or unfavorable medical occurrence in a clinical research study 
participant, including any abnormal sign (e.g. abnormal physical exam or laboratory 
finding), symptom or disease, temporarily associated with the participants’ involvement 
in the research, whether or not considered related to participation in the research. 
(Source: NIH, NIA Glossary of Clinical Research Terms)
B
Blinded    
clinical trialBlinding is a procedure in which one or more parties in a trial are kept unaware of which 
treatment arms participants have been assigned to, in other words, which treatment 
was received. (EUPATI, The concept of blinding in clinical trials)
C
Clinical 
developmentClinical development is one step in the process of bringing new medicines or treatments 
to the market. They follow different phases designated as Phase I, II, III (and IV after 
marketing authorization). (Source: EUPATI, Toolbox: Glossary)
Clinical Trial 
ParticipantsIndividuals that participate in a clinical trial. 
Compassionate 
useExpanded access, also called “compassionate use”, provides a pathway for patients to 
gain access to investigational drugs, biologics and medical devices for serious diseases 
or conditions. Investigational drugs and devices have not yet been approved by the 
regulatory bodies, e.g., the US Food and Drug Administration, and they have not been 
proven to be safe and effective. 
Therefore, they may be effective in the treatment of a condition, or they may not. It is 
important to remember that the drug/biologic/medical device may have unexpected 
serious side effects and that patients need to consider all the possible risks when 
seeking access to an investigational medical product (Source: FDA, 2019).
Control group The group of participants that receives standard treatment or a placebo. The control 
group may also be made up of healthy volunteers.
Researchers compare results from the control group with results from the experimental 
group to find and learn from any differences (Source: FDA, 2019).Glossary of terms
  43  43
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Terminology Explanation
C
Contract 
Research 
Organization 
(CRO)A person or an organization (commercial, academic, or other) contracted by the 
sponsor to perform one or more of a sponsor’s trial-related duties and functions                          
(Source: EMA, 2017).
E
Endpoint Principal indicator(s) used for assessing the primary question (i.e., hypothesis) of a clinical 
trial. A variable that pertains to the efficacy or safety evaluations of a trial. An endpoint is 
more specific as compared to an outcome since it relates to the planned objective of the 
study (Source: FDA, n/a).
Ethics 
committeeAn independent body made up of a range of individuals including medical or scientific 
professionals and non-medical or non-scientific members (e.g., patients or lay members). 
An ethics committee may operate within an institution, or it may be national, or 
supranational or private. Ethics committees have a responsibility to ensure the protection 
of the rights, safety and wellbeing of research participants, as well as assuring the public 
of that protection. It operates, among other things, expressing an opinion on the clinical 
trial protocol, the suitability of the investigators involved in the trial, the adequacy of 
facilities, and on the methods and documents to be used to inform trial participants and 
obtain their informed consent. A trial should only begin when a favorable opinion by an 
ethics committee has been given. Ethics committees may also monitor studies once they 
have begun and after they are complete. (Source: EUPATI Toolbox: Glossary)
Exclusion 
criteriaCharacteristics that exclude people from taking part in a trial. For example, depending 
on the requirements of the trial, exclusion criteria might include age, sex, type or stage of 
disease, and the presence or absence of other medical conditions. Exclusion criteria (and 
inclusion criteria) are an important part of a trial protocol. If they are properly defined, 
exclusion and inclusion criteria will increase the chances of a trial producing reliable 
results. They also protect participants from harm and help avoid exploitation of vulnerable 
people (such as those unable to provide informed consent). The reasons for choosing the 
exclusion criteria should be documented with the trial protocol. Exclusion of certain groups 
can affect how realistic it is to generalize the trial results to the relevant patient population 
(external validity). This should be considered by researchers when they are designing a 
trial, and unnecessary exclusions should be avoided. (Source: EUPATI, Toolbox: Glossary)
I
Inclusion 
criteriaCharacteristics that potential participants must have in order to be considered for 
participation in a trial. They describe the patient population and patient selection criteria. 
Inclusion criteria should specify the type of testing used to make the patients’ diagnoses, 
as well as specific disease requirements (for example, how severe the disease is, failure or 
success with previous treatments, plus any other factors that might affect prognosis such 
as age, sex, or ethnicity). The inclusion criteria (and exclusion criteria) are important parts 
of a trial protocol. If they are properly defined, inclusion and exclusion criteria will increase 
the chances that the trial produces reliable results. They also protect participants from 
harm and minimize the risks. (Source: EUPATI, Toolbox: Glossary)Glossary of terms
  44  44
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Terminology Explanation
I
Informed 
consent form 
(ICF)A document that describes the rights of a study participant and provides details about  
the study, such as its purpose, duration, required procedures, and key contacts. Risks 
and potential benefits are explained in the informed consent document. (Source: NIH, NIA 
Glossary of Clinical Research Terms)
M
Multicenter 
TrialA clinical trial that is carried out at more than one medical institution. (Source: NIH, NCI 
Glossary of Cancer Terms)
P
Patient  ●Individual patients: Persons with individual experience of living with the disease or 
pre-identified presenting risk factors. Technical knowledge in research, development 
and regulatory is not required as the main role is to contribute with their subjective 
experience on the disease, diagnostics and treatment.
 ●Carers: Persons supporting individual patients such as family members, paid or 
volunteer helpers. 
 ●Patient advocates: Persons who have insight and experience in supporting a larger 
population of patients living with a disease. They contribute with the experience 
acquired personally and from the group they represent.
 ●Patient experts: Persons with individual experience in the disease and additional 
technical knowledge in medicines R&D and regulatory affairs through training or 
experience. 
 ●Patient organizations: Not-for-profit legal organizations (including the umbrella 
organizations that it belongs to) mainly composed of patients and/or carers. They 
provide support to patients and advice to clinical research teams.
 ●Patient organization representatives: Persons who are mandated to represent and 
express the collective views of a patient organization on a specific issue or disease 
area. These individuals may or may not be patients or carers themselves. 
 ●Patient partners: patients that partner with the sponsor and are actively involved in 
the development of the clinical trial protocol.
Patient-
reported 
outcome 
(PRO)Measures of the subjective experience or view of a participant in a clinical study. It is not a 
clinical measure, or an assessment made by anyone else involved in the study. PROs are 
commonly collected by asking patients to fill in questionnaires, or by interviewing patients. 
Questionnaires or interview guides used as part of clinical studies should undergo 
extensive testing to ensure they are reliable and valid. PROs can be used to assess, for 
example, symptoms as experienced by the patient, e.g., disability, quality of life and other 
health perceptions. There are many published PRO questionnaires dealing with aspects 
of quality of life. Some have been developed for specific conditions or treatments. Some 
are designed to be general, such as the ‘EuroQoL’ or ‘EQ-5D’, which has been translated 
into many languages and is used extensively in clinical trials. (Source: EUPATI, Toolbox: 
Glossary)
Placebo An inactive substance or other intervention that looks the same as, and is given the same 
way as, an active drug or treatment being tested. The effects of the active drug or other 
intervention are compared to the effects of the placebo. (NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms)Glossary of terms
  45  45
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
Terminology Explanation
P
Plain Language 
SummaryA non-technical summary of clinical trial results or other content in a journal 
article or congress presentation. This How-To guide refers to PLS for publications 
and conferences and does not include PLSs that are created per EU regulations               
(e.g., layperson summaries) that follow a certain regulatory rigor (Source: EMA, 2017)
Primary 
endpointsThe main result that is measured at the end of a study to see if a given treatment 
worked (e.g., the number of deaths or the difference in survival between the treatment 
group and the control group). What the primary endpoint will be is decided before the 
study begins. (NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms)
Protocol A detailed plan of a scientific or medical experiment, treatment, or procedure. In 
clinical trials, it states what the study will do, how it will be done, and why it is being 
done. It explains how many people will be in the study, who is eligible to take part in it, 
what study drugs or other interventions will be given, what tests will be done and how 
often, and what information will be collected. (NCI’s Dictionary of Cancer Terms).
R
Randomization The process of assigning clinical trial participants to treatment or control groups 
using an element of chance to determine the assignments in order to reduce bias.            
(Source: NIH, NIA Glossary of Clinical Research Terms)
Recruitment Active efforts by investigators to identify subjects who may be suitable for enrollment 
into a clinical trial. 
Subjects are selected on the basis of the protocol’s inclusion and exclusion criteria 
during the clinical trial recruitment period. In multicenter studies, each investigator has 
a recruitment target or defined number of subjects to be recruited (Source: FDA, n/a)
Recruitment plan The plan that outlines how individuals will be recruited for the study and how the study 
will reach the recruitment goal. (Source: NIH, NIA Glossary of Clinical Research Terms)
S
Secondary 
endpoint(s) Result(s) that are measured at the end of a study, in addition to the main result 
(primary endpoint) to see if a given treatment worked. Secondary endpoints can 
explore other aspects of the treatment (Source: EMA, 2010).
Side effect An unintended response to a medication. Side effects, or adverse reactions, are 
generally regarded as being harmful, and may occur after a single dose or prolonged 
administration. They might result from the normal use of a medicine or from the use of 
a medicine in a way unintended by the marketing authorization holder (MAH) – such 
as taking an overdose or from the combination of two or more medicines being taken 
at once. (Source: EUPATI, Toolbox: Glossary)Glossary of terms
  46  46
Preparations for setting up 
partnership and collaborationBuilding a partnership for 
optimal patient engagementPatient Engagement in the 
Clinical Trial Protocol DesignFeedback and follow-upStep 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 Glossary
References for the terms presented in this glossary can be found in the 
following resources:
EU. European Medicines Agency. (2017) Summaries of Clinical Trial Results for Laypersons. 
Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health/sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-10/2017_01_26_
summaries_of_ct_results_for_laypersons.pdf  
EU. European Medicines Agency. (2010) EU Clinical Trials Register Glossary. 
Available at: https://www.clinicaltrialsregister.eu/doc/EU_Clinical_Trials_Register_Glossary.pdf    
EU. European Medicines Agency (EMA) (1997) Good Clinical Practice: Consolidated guideline. 
Available at: https://ec.europa.eu/health//sites/health/files/files/eudralex/vol-10/3cc1aen_en.pdf
EUPATI. Toolbox: Glossary. 
Available at: https://toolbox.eupati.eu/glossary/  
National Cancer Institute (NCI). NCI Dictionary of Cancer Terms. 
Available at: https://www.cancer.gov/publications/dictionaries/cancer-terms/
National Institute of Health (NIH). (n/a) National Institute on Aging (NIA) Glossary of Clinical 
Research Terms. 
Available at: https://www.nia.nih.gov/research/dgcg/nia-glossary-clinical-research-terms  
US. Food and Drug Administration. (2019) Clinical Trials: What Patients need to know, Glossary of 
Terms. 
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/patients/clinical-trials-what-patients-need-know/glossary-terms   
US. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (2018) Step 3: Clinical Research. 
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/patients/drug-development-process/step-3-clinical-
research#phases 
US. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) (n/a) Glossary of terms on Clinical Trials for Patient 
Engagement Advisory Committee. 
Available at: https://www.fda.gov/media/108378/download#:~:text=Active%20efforts%20by%20
investigators%20to,the%20clinical%20trial%20recruitment%20period.  Glossary of terms