 
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
 
ICH Secretariat, Route de Pré -Bois 20, 1215 Geneva, Switzerland  
Telephone: +41 (22) 710 74 80 - admin@ich.org, http://www.ich.org   
Final Concept Paper  
Targeted Revisions of the ICH Stability Guideline Series  
(Guidelines ICH Q1A -F, ICH Q5C)  
Endorsed by the Management Committee on 15 November 2022  
 
Type of Harmonisation Action Proposed  
Revision of the ICH Stability Guideline Series  Q1A -F and Q5C is recommended to  a) streamline  the 
series by combining the various guidelines into a single guideline  focused on co re stability principles ; 
b) promote harmoni sed interpretation  by address ing potential gaps and areas of ambiguity ; c) address 
additional technical issues,  includ ing relevant stability strategies and innovative  tools  that strengthen the 
application of risk  management ; and d) consider inclusion of new topics, such as stability considerations 
for advanced therapies . The informal working group proposes to establish these updates through the 
Revision  procedure . The envisioned result is a combined guideline, ICH Q1 , with integrated annexes 
and/or appendices  that address specific topics  beyond the core principle s on stability recommendations  
and to address product  type1 specific  recom mendations , as required .  It is also recommended to update 
and supplement current training materia l. 
Statement of the Perceived Problem:  
Further to a comprehensiv e assessment of existing Quality guidelines and in consideration of potential 
future topics, ICH’s Quality Discussion Group (QDG) issued the report to the ICH Management 
Committee entitled “ Future Opportunities & Modernization of ICH Quality Guidelines: Implementation 
of the ICH Quality Vision from the ICH Quality Reflection Paper ”, which was subsequently published 
on the ICH website in October 2021. Maintenance of the Q1/Q5C Stability guideline series was 
determined as one of the  highest priorities based on the evaluation and recommendations from the QDG . 
As written, ICH Q1A -E (plus content of the withdrawn ICH Q1F currently covered by WHO) and ICH 
Q5C do not align with the format of more  recently developed  ICH guidelines that embrace a harmoni sed 
core document approach supported by  topic -specific annexes /appendices . The individual guideline 
approach leads to interpretation of the guidelines on an indi vidual basis, with uncertainty around how 
they should work together.  ICH Q5C, for example, is specific to stability of biotechnological/biological 
products and it is often unclear wh ich chapters of the ICH Q1 series apply to biologics as well.   
Furtherm ore, the stability guidelines do not reflect modern analytical technologies and tools.  
Incorporation of guidance that addresses the use of stability modelling  and risk management  could 
enable earlier patient access to high quality medicines.  Additionally, the current guideline s do not 
address  stability considerations for  advanced  and emerging product types1. 
 
 
 
1 Product type refers to all aspects of the drug product, including drug substance, intermediates,  and devices.  

FINAL                                             Q1/Q5C Con cept Pap er                              Endorsed : 15 Nove mber  2022   
 
-2- 
 Issues to be Resolved:  
The Expert Working Group will aim to address the f ollowing identified issues :   
• Consistency of interpretation : 
o Through reorgani sation into a core guideline with topic -specific annexes /appendices , 
the update will clarify  which parts of the guideline apply to which product types.  
o Improve harmoni sation by clarifying perceived ambiguities  within  the current 
guideline . 
 
• Clarification of technical components of current guideline  and stability -related concepts ; may 
include but not limited to : 
o Combine common/overlapping principles and expand on items specific for Drug 
Substances  (DS) /Intermediates/Drug Products  (DP) . 
o Additional p roducts  not comprehensively covered by  the existing  ICH stability 
guidelines  to be considered  can include Cell  and Gene Therapy Products / Advanced 
Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMPs), Oligonucleotides,  Peptides , Generics, 
Biosimilars, New products developed from approved  active substances , Vaccines , 
Plasma -derived products , and regulated over the counter (OTC) products .  As part of 
this consideration , certain  stability c oncepts (e.g., retest date) may not be applicable to 
all product types . 
o Data and evaluation strategies for defining the retest  period /shelf -life (DS) (align with 
ICH Q7) and shelf -life (DP) . 
o Baseline  considerations in designing a stability protocol  (e.g.,  storage 
temperatures /%RH/study timepoints , stability -indicating methods , Climatic Zones III 
and IV (former ICH Q1F guideline) . 
o Container Closure System: packaging configurations on stability ; related conditions  for 
drug and drug-device combination products . 
o Photostability: testing expectations , relevant testing conditions  and applicability  
o The practical use of bracketing and/or matrixing . 
o For compatibility studies, consideration for microbial testing and compatibility with 
drug delivery systems (e.g., infusion bags, pumps, syringes, in -line filters and tubing) . 
o Clarification of how in -use stability and container closure integrity  studies are 
conducted (i.e., in -use stability vs. open dish/worst case stability and container closure 
integrity (CCI) testing in lieu of sterility , including multidose containers ). 
o Clarity on in -use/end user storage  conditions  (storage of drug product  as supplied) , 
including multi dose container s. 
o Expectations for products requiring preparation prior to use (e.g., [re]constitution or 
dilution , mixing with other media) . 
o Excipient  (when applicable)  and adjuvant stability considera tions . 
o Clarity on application of antimicrobial effectiveness testing ( AET ) on stability .  
o Update of the current glossary to define the new topics  and terms . 
o Clarify the difference and intent of studies under accelerated and stressed stability 
conditions , as well as forced degradation studies . 
o Stability profiling of reference materials/standards  when applicable .  
o Acceptance criteria for stability testing versus release testing . 

FINAL                                             Q1/Q5C Con cept Pap er                              Endorsed : 15 Nove mber  2022   
 
-3- 
 o Analytical procedure validation aspects including stress testing con ditions to 
demonstrate the stability -indicating ability of the test method, algorithms used ( to align 
with ICH Q2 and Q14).  
o Clarity on the determination of water loss calculations when used in place of storage of 
the drug product at low humidity conditions  for semi -permeable containers.  
 
• Address new technolog ies and modern tools/strategies used as part of enhanced product 
understanding:  
o Modelling techniques , criteria for selection of batches , applicability,  and 
caveats /limitations . 
o Expectations for statistical approaches  and potential for Artificial Intellige nce 
modelling methodologies.  
o Expectations  for the justification of appropriate studies to determine shelf life for drug 
products and retest date /shelf life  for drug substance s. 
o Advances in unders tanding accelerated stability conditions and prior knowledge which 
may support extrapolation . 
o Use of risk management  to define appropriate stability strategies . 
o Importance of justifying the product -specific stability test conditions and methods in 
the stab ility protocol . 
o Ensure consistency with (or refer to) the ICH Q13 discussion of stability considerations 
for continuous manufacturing . 
 
• Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS)  related stability topics :  
o Stability related  considerations  through the product supply chain (e.g., excursions 
during storage and transportation , freeze -thaw cycle stability ). 
o Stability related considerations  related to processing and hold-time studies during 
manufacture .  
o Stability approaches  for manufacturing  of DS and/or DP at multiple manufacturing 
sites.  
o Considerations  of Out of Specification (OOS) , Out of Trend (O OT) and significant 
change for stability data , and expectations for trending within the PQS .  
 
• Clarify applicability of requirements across development and lifecycle :  
o Application of an integrated, science and risk -based approach to stability . 
o Labelled storage statements/recommendations (e.g., in-use periods , temperature 
conditions) .  
o Common f iling considerations,  e.g., stability protocol/repo rt; minimum data sets .  
o Consider  and clarify  applicabili ty of phase specific stability through out the different 
stages of product development .  
o Address how concepts should be applied to address product lifecycle /post -approval . 
changes (risk -based approaches based on change)  and ensure consistency  with ICH Q12  
principles . 
 
• Training strategies and alignment with other guidelines  
o Development of training materials related to the guideline updates with a focus on new 
content.   
o Development of case studi es. 

FINAL                                             Q1/Q5C Con cept Pap er                              Endorsed : 15 Nove mber  2022   
 
-4- 
 Background to the Proposal:  
The original Q1A guideline (reaching Step 4 in 1993) was one of the first guidelines to be finalised at 
ICH. In the early 2000s, the parent Stability guideline had undergone a revision process and several 
further guidelines were developed and finalised. Multiple ICH guidelines in the Q1 series had been 
endorsed as ‘supplementing guidance’ and were given the sub -letters, i.e.,  Q1B, Q1C etc. These 
individual guidelines were intended as  ‘subchapters’ of the “parent” Q1A(R2) stability guideline. This 
was done in the 1990s and in the early 2000s to build on initial achievements of harmoni sation and avoid 
potentially reopening a section or a guideline where consensus was already achieved. ICH Q5C was 
later written to address the biotech/biological aspects of stability. ICH Q1F was later withdrawn in June 
2006 and the aspects of stability tes ting in Climatic Zones III and IV were referenced to the WHO 
guideline ‘Annex 10, Technical Report Series, 1010, 2018’ since at that time the ICH Regions resided 
in Climatic Zones I and II. With more recently developed ICH guidelines, beginning with ICH Q7  and 
through Q14, ICH guidelines typically bear a single number and incorporate a broader array of topics 
as structured  annexes/addenda . 
 
The ICH Q1 series (Q1A -Q1E)  as a Tier 1 guideline , ICH Q5C , and the WHO stability guidance 
covering Climatic Zones III  and IV (i.e., content of the withdrawn ICH Q1F) are implemented 
successfully in the regulatory framework by most regulatory authorities. However, experience gained 
with the implementation since the finalisation of these guidelines  shows uncertainties rela ted to the 
interpretation of the individual guidelines and how they fit together. Furthermore, it is recognized that  
innovation in analytical testing including approaches as described in ICH Q2 and ICH Q14 along with 
the development of control strategies ( ICH Q8  and Q 11), Quality Risk Management principles (ICH 
Q9) and lifecycle approaches (as addressed in ICH Q10 and ICH Q12) create additional  uncertainty for 
industry and regulatory agencies regarding how these pieces contribute to the assessment of  produc t 
stability. This results in technical issues regarding stability that should  be addressed to harmoni se 
approaches and expectations during product development and regulatory review and inspections.  
 
Type of Expert Working Group Recommended:  
The EWG should include regulators and industry representatives with background and expertise in either 
(or both) the  technical and regulatory aspects of pharmaceutical stability.  Representatives should 
comprise  expertise in Chemistry, Manufacturing and Co ntrols (CMC), Good Manufacturing Practices 
(GMP) , API/drug substance, drug product, small and large molecules,  statistics,  and predictive 
modelling.  The EWG should also include expert s in Cell and Gene  Therapy/ATMP product  types to 
help add this topic in t he revised guidance.   
Timing:  
It is proposed that this work is initiated in Q4 calendar year 2022, following finali sation of the Concept 
Paper and Business Plan and establishment of an Expert Working Group.  It is anticipated that the 
development of an ICH Q1 guideline using the concepts outlined  in ICH Q1A -Q1E, WHO -Stability 
(Q1F) and ICH Q5C guideline could reach Step 1  two years after initiation of an EWG and Step 4  in the 
year after that .  Training materia ls will be initiated during Step 3 and available after Step 4 . 
• Q4 calendar year 2022 - Final Concept Paper,  Business Plan  
• Q4 calendar year  2024 – Complete Step 1  
• Q4 calendar year  2025 – Complete Step 4   

