Cohort Studies
Design, Analysis, and Reporting
Xiaofeng Wang, PhD; and Michael W. Kattan, PhD
Cohort studies are types of observational studies in which a cohort, or a group of individuals
sharing some characteristic, are followed up over time, and outcomes are measured at one or
more time points. Cohort studies can be classi ﬁed as prospective or retrospective studies, and
they have several advantages and disadvantages. This article reviews the essential charac-
teristics of cohort studies and includes recommendations on the design, statistical analysis, and
reporting of cohort studies in respiratory and critical care medicine. Tools are provided for re-
searchers and reviewers. CHEST 2020; 158(1S):S72-S78
KEY WORDS: bias; cohort studies; confounding; prospective; retrospective
General Overview of Cohort Study
Design
The term “cohort ”in modern epidemiology
refers to “a group of people with de ﬁned
characteristics who are followed up to
determine the incidence of, or mortality
from, some speci ﬁc disease, all causes of
death, or some other outcome. ”1A cohort
study observes people as two or more groups,from exposure to outcome.
2A key feature of
the cohort study design is that subjects are
followed up over time. It begins with subjects
who are exposed and not exposed to a factor
and then evaluates the subsequent
occurrence of an outcome. Unlike cross-
sectional studies, which are often used to
determine prevalence, cohort studies are used
to study incidence, causes, and prognosis.
In clinical research, cohort studies are
appropriate when there is evidence to
suggest an association between an exposure
and an outcome, and the time interval
between exposure and the development ofoutcome is reasonable. Cohort studies are
the design of choice for determining theincidence and natural history of a condition.
Due to their longitudinal design feature, one
can look at disease progression and natural
history.
3Cohort studies allow us to calculate
the incidence rate, cumulative incidence,
relative risk, and hazard ratio. Causality
cannot be established de ﬁnitively through a
cohort study.2Nevertheless, cohort studies
are useful to provide evidence that suggestscausality and information regarding the
strength of the association between the risk
factors and the outcome.
Description of Subtypes of Cohort
Studies
Cohort studies can be either prospective or
retrospective. The type of cohort study is
determined by the outcome status. If the
outcome has not occurred at the start of the
study, then it is a prospective study; if the
outcome has already occurred, then it is a
retrospective study.4Figure 1 presents a
ABBREVIATION: CAP = community-acquired pneumonia
AFFILIATIONS: From the Department of Quantitative Health Sciences,
Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic, Cleveland, OH.
CORRESPONDENCE TO: Xiaofeng Wang, PhD, Department of Quan-
titative Health Sciences, Lerner Research Institute, Cleveland Clinic,9500 Euclid Ave/JJN3-01, Cleveland, OH 44195; e-mail: wangx6@ccf.
org
Copyright /C2112020 American College of Chest Physicians. Published by
Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chest.2020.03.014[Supplement An Overview of Study Design and Statistical Considerations ]
S72 Supplement [158#1S CHEST JULY 2020 ]

graphical representation of the designs of prospective
and retrospective cohort studies. The distinguishing
feature of a prospective cohort study is that at the time
that the investigators begin enrolling subjects, none of
the subjects has developed the outcome of interest. In
contrast, a retrospective study is conceived after subjects
have already developed the outcome. The investigators
jump back in time to identify a cohort of subjects at apoint in time when they did not have the outcome. A
prospective cohort study design is ranked higher in the
hierarchy of evidence than a retrospective design
because the outcome, predictor, and confounding
variables can be better measured and controlled.
5
Information gained from a retrospective study can behelpful in planning a future prospective study.
6
A study combining two study designs, the case-cohortdesign, is a combination of a case-control and cohort
design that can be either prospective or retrospective. The
case-cohort design can be viewed as a variant of the
nested case-control design.
7In a nested case-control
study, one starts with identifying cases that have alreadyoccurred (retrospective) or as they occur (prospective) in
ad eﬁned cohort. A speci ﬁcn u m b e ro fc o n t r o ls u b j e c t s
are then selected from among those in the cohort.
Limitations in this type of design include: (1) inef ﬁciency
due to the need to align each selected case subject to its
matched control subject; and (2) when there is more than
one outcome considered, strict implementation of the
design requires the selection of a new set of control
subjects for each distinct disease outcome. The case-cohort design was proposed by Prentice
8as a cost-
effective alternative to the nested case-control design. In a
case-cohort design, a subcohort is randomly drawn from
the full cohort, and the case-cohort sample consists of the
subcohort plus those subjects from the entire cohort
whose outcome occurred during the study period.
Figure 2 illustrates the subject selection process of a case-
cohort sample. The case-cohort study design is ef ﬁcient
when only a very small fraction of the full cohort develops
the outcome in the given study time frame and the
exposure measurement of interest is expensive to obtain.9
Use Cases of Cohort Studies
Example 1
Nijkeuter et al10conducted a prospective cohort study to
understand the natural course of hemodynamically
stable pulmonary embolism (PE). The study aimed toevaluate the incidence of recurrent VTE, hemorrhagicStudy Population
Exposed Group
Event
GroupNo event
GroupUnexposed Group
Event
GroupNo event
GroupPresent
Start Study
Prospective Cohort Study
(”Look Ahead”) Retrospective Cohort Study
(”Look back”)Past Future
Figure 1 –Graphical representation of the timeline in a prospective vs a retrospective cohort study design.
Cohort
Case
subjects
Random Subcohort
Cases in subcohort
Figure 2 –An illustration for subject selection in a case-cohort study.
The case-cohort sample consists of the subcohort members as well as all
the case subjects who are outside of the subcohort.
chestjournal.org S73

complications, and mortality in patients with PE, and to
identify risk factors and the time course of these events.
Between November 2002 and September 2004, a total of
3,503 patients with clinically suspected PE were
screened, and PE was diagnosed in 674 patients. Three-
month follow-up was completed in 673 of the 674
patients with PE. The authors found that recurrent VTE
occurred in a small percentage of patients treated for an
acute PE, and the majority of recurrent VTEs were fatal.
Immobilization, hospitalization, age, COPD, and
malignancies were risk factors for recurrent VTE,bleeding, and mortality.
Example 2
Short et al11performed a retrospective cohort study to
examine the effect of b-blockers in the management of
COPD. They searched a disease-speci ﬁc database of
patients with COPD and linked to the Scottish
morbidity records of acute hospital admissions, the
Tayside community pharmacy prescription records, and
the General Register Of ﬁce for Scotland death registry. A
total of 5,977 patients aged >50 years with a diagnosis
of COPD were identi ﬁed and divided into two groups
according to b-blocker use. The study found that
b-blockers might reduce mortality and COPD
exacerbations when added to established inhaled
stepwise therapy for COPD, independently of overt
cardiovascular disease and cardiac drugs, and with no
adverse effects on pulmonary function.
Example 3
Skull et al12described the epidemiology of community-
acquired pneumonia (CAP) in elderly Australian
subjects. Using a case-cohort design, cases with CAP
were identi ﬁed as in-patients aged $65 years with
International Statistical Classi ﬁcation of Diseases and
Related Health Problems, Tenth Revision, AustralianModi ﬁcation codes J10 to J18 admitted over 2 years to
two tertiary hospitals. The cohort sample was randomly
selected from all hospital discharges and frequency-
matched to case subjects according to month. A total of
4,772 inpatients were studied. The strongest predictors
of CAP were previous pneumonia, history of other
respiratory disease, and aspiration. ICU admission, renal
disease, and increasing age were the strongest predictors
of mortality, whereas in ﬂuenza vaccination conferred
protection.
Beneﬁts and Downside of Cohort Studies
A major advantage of the cohort study design is the
ability to study multiple outcomes that can be associatedwith a single exposure or multiple exposures in a single
study. Even the combined effect of multiple exposures
on the outcome can be determined. Cohort study
designs also allow for the study of rare exposures.
Investigators can speci ﬁcally select subjects exposed to a
certain factor. Furthermore, cohort studies often have
broader inclusion and fewer exclusion criteria compared
with randomized controlled trials. The investigators may
obtain large samples and reach greater power in
statistical analysis relative to a randomized controlled
trial. For these reasons, results from cohort studies maybe more generalizable in clinical practice. Finally, the
longitudinal nature of cohort studies means that changes
in levels of exposure over time, and changes in outcome,
can be measured to provide insight into the dynamic
relation between exposure and outcome.
Prospective and retrospective studies have different
strengths and weaknesses. Prospective cohort studies are
conducted from the present time to the future, and thus
they have an advantage of being accurate regarding the
information collected about exposures, end points, and
confounders. The disadvantage could be the long period
of follow-up while waiting for events to occur, leading to
vulnerability to a high rate of loss to follow-up.
Retrospective studies rely on data collected in the past to
identify both exposures and outcomes. These studies use
data that have already been collected, such as would be
obtained using a database extracted from electronicmedical records. Thus, cohort studies are often time-
efﬁcient and cost-effective. However, many retrospective
cohort studies use data that were collected in the past for
another objective. Hence, the investigators lack control
over the collection of data. The measurement of
variables might be inaccurate or inconsistent, which
results in a source of information bias. Table 1
summarizes the advantages and disadvantages of cohort
studies.
Study Subject Considerations
There are several considerations related to the subjectsof a cohort study. These include selection of an
appropriate sample of the population of interest, the
sampling method that will be used, access to
longitudinal data for the subjects chosen, and the sample
size required to properly power the study. The criteria
for inclusion and exclusion should be determined at the
study design stage. The study subjects selected should be
appropriate for the study question and should be
generalizable to the population of interest. Avoiding bias
S74 Supplement [158#1S CHEST JULY 2020 ]

in subject selection, ensuring generalizability of the
results, and determining the feasibility of performing an
adequately powered study are crucial elements of the
study design.
Sample size determination for cohort studies has been
widely discussed in the literature.13-15A comparison of
incidence rates is usually the major aim of a cohortstudy. Assume that and p
1are the incidence rates of the
end point of interest in the exposed and unexposed
samples. The sample size is typically calculated based on
the following statistical hypothesis:
H0:p1¼p2vs H 1:p1sp2
The sample size formula can be found in Fleiss et al.16
For paired cohort studies or case-cohort designs, the
formulae can be found in Kasiulevi /C20cius et al17and Cai
and Zeng.9When the outcome of interest in a cohort
study is continuous (although it is less common), we
would like to compare the means of two cohorts. The
formula based on the minimum detectable differencecan be found in Woodward.
18
It is also important to consider subject loss to follow-upin designing a cohort study. Any sample size calculated
should be in ﬂated to account for the expected dropouts.
For instance, if the dropout rate is expected to be 10%,
the estimated sample size would be Nmultiplied by 1/(1-
0.1). A general discussion about sample size
determination is presented in the article by Wang and
Ji
19included in this supplemental issue of CHEST .A s
part of that article, an online calculator has beendeveloped to help readers to perform the sample size
estimation for cohort studies. It can be found at http://
riskcalc.org:3838/samplesize/ .
Statistical Considerations
Investigators often use cohorts to assess the association
between multiple exposures and multiple outcomes over
time and to build prognostic/prediction models. The
modeling and analysis strategy could be sophisticated in
cohort studies. Here we emphasize a few important
aspects of statistical analysis.
Bias
Bias may be de ﬁned as any systematic error in a clinical
study that results in an incorrect estimate of the true
effect of an exposure on the outcome. A major source of
potential bias in cohort studies is due to loss to follow-
up. This occurs due to dropouts or death, which often
occurs in studies with long follow-up durations. A
general rule of thumb requires that the loss to follow-uprate does not exceed 20% of the sample.
20It is
recommended that investigators examine any systematic
differences related to the outcome and/or exposures
between those who completed the study and those who
were lost to follow-up. Methods of minimizing loss to
follow-up in a prospective cohort study have been
comprehensively discussed by Hulley et al.21We
suggest that the investigators report median follow-up
for patients without the event or the number followed
up without an event at a given follow-up time.
For example, consider the case of a cohort of 1,000TABLE 1 ]Advantages and Disadvantages of Cohort Studies
Advantages
Can investigate multiple outcomes that may be associated with multiple exposuresAble to study the change in exposure and outcome over timeGood for examining rare exposuresCan measure incidence of outcome
May be able to infer causality
Prospective Study Retrospective StudyAble to control design, sampling, data collection, and follow-up methods Time-ef ﬁcient and inexpensive
Can measure all variables of interest Easy to obtain large sampleDisadvantages
Susceptible to loss to follow-up compared with cross-sectional studiesConfounding variables are the major problem in analyzing the data compared with RCTs
Prospective Study Retrospective StudyMay be expensive to conduct Less control over variablesTime-consuming Susceptible to information bias and recall bias
RCTs¼randomized controlled trials.
chestjournal.org S75

patients with COPD treated in 1970 and followed up
until 2010. The median follow-up for all patients
might be far less than the median follow-up for
patients who survived. The latter statistic may provide
a more accurate impression of how long the cohort
had been followed up. Now assume that in 2009, a
second cohort of 2,000 patients were added to the
study. The median follow-up for survivors will now be
around 1 year, which is again misleading. An alternative
would be to report a statistic such as “312 patients have
been followed up without a death event for at least35 years. ”
There are many other types of bias in clinical studies.
Examples include allocation bias, prevalence-incidence
bias, recall bias, and detection bias. In the accompanying
cross-sectional study article included in this
supplemental issue of CHEST , Wang and Cheng
22
provide a detailed discussion regarding common types
of biases and their de ﬁnitions in clinical studies.
Confounding
Confounding often occurs in cohort studies. For a
variable to be a confounder, it should meet three
conditions: (1) be associated with the exposure being
investigated; (2) be associated with the outcome being
investigated; and (3) not be in the causal pathwaybetween exposure and outcome. Confounding could
result in a distortion of the effects; it may lead to
overestimation or underestimation of an effect, or even
reverse the direction of an effect. For example, a study
found that alcohol consumption was associated with
lung cancer. A person who drinks alcohol is more likely
to smoke, and smoking is a risk factor for lung cancer.
Controlling for the potential confounding effect of
smoking may show that there is no association between
alcohol consumption and lung cancer. Figure 3 shows
the relation among the exposure, confounder, andoutcome in this example.Many statistical methods can be applied to control for
confounding factors, both at the design stage and in the
data analysis. The aim of controlling for confounding is
to make the groups as similar as possible with respect to
the confounders. At the design stage, restriction is a
common method for controlling confounders. The
investigators ﬁrst identify potential confounding factors
based on previous studies or the knowledge that
confounding is biologically plausible. The investigators
then limit participation in the study to individuals who
are similar with respect to those confounders. Forexample, a lung cancer study restricted to smokers will
eliminate any confounding effect of smoking. A
drawback of this method is that it may be dif ﬁcult to
generalize the ﬁndings to the rest of the population.
At the analysis stage, strati ﬁcation is one of the popular
controlling methods. Strati ﬁcation allows the association
between exposure and outcome to be examined within
different strata of the confounding variables. For
example, a study is conducted to examine the association
between lung cancer and exposure to asbestos. To
control for smoking, the study population could be
strati ﬁed according to smoking status. The association
between exposure to asbestos and cancer can then be
assessed separately within each stratum. An issue with
stratifying is that strata with more individuals will tendto have a more precise estimate of the association (with a
smaller SE) than strata with fewer individuals. For this
reason, the Cochran-Mantel-Haenszel method is often
used in strati ﬁcation analysis. It allows calculating an
overall and adjusted effect estimate of a given exposure
for a speci ﬁc outcome by combining (pooling with
weight) stratum-speci ﬁc relative risks or OR.
23
Multivariable regression analysis is a model-based
method to control for confounding. One builds a
multivariable regression model for the outcome and
exposure as well as other confounding variables. Based
on the regression equation, the effect of the variable of
interest can be examined with confounding variables
held constant statistically. Multivariable regression has
the advantage in that it can control simultaneously for
more confounding variables than can strati ﬁcation. It
has the disadvantage in that this model may not ﬁt the
data well. The investigators have to be careful to use
accepted variable selection procedures.
The propensity score method is also popular for
controlling confounding.24The propensity score is the
probability of treatment/exposure assignment
conditioned on observed baseline characteristics. It
allows investigators to mimic some of the characteristicsConfounder
Smoking
Exposure
Alcohol
consumptionOutcome
Lung cancer
Figure 3 –An example of illustrating the relation among exposure,
confounder, and outcome.
S76 Supplement [158#1S CHEST JULY 2020 ]

of a randomized controlled trial in a cohort study. In
practice, propensity score analysis involves a two-step
procedure. The ﬁrst stage of the analysis is to estimate
the propensity score. We consider the exposure variable
as the response variable and build a regression model
with the variables that in ﬂuence exposure group
membership, such as sex and age. This model is used to
give each subject a propensity score that measures the
propensity (probability) to be exposed given the
subject ’s characteristics. In the second stage, the
outcomes of interest are compared between exposed andunexposed following adjustment for propensity scores.
There are different approaches on using propensity
scoring but they all yield similar results: matching on the
propensity score, strati ﬁcation on the propensity score,
inverse probability of treatment weighting using the
propensity score, and covariate adjustment using the
propensity score.
25Although propensity score methods
are powerful, they involve sophisticated statistical
techniques. A deep understanding of the methodology isnecessary when implementing the speci ﬁc analysis.
There are other methods of controlling for confounding
such as instrumental variable analysis and regression
discontinuity design; details are provided in Merrill
1and
Rothman et al.2The application of directed acyclic
graphs in observational studies assessing associations is
described in a separate article included in this
supplemental issue of CHEST (Etminan et al26).
Model Building
Model building is often crucial in cohort studies.
Investigators may need to build explanatory models or
predictive models. In explanatory modeling, one isinterested in identifying variables that have a
scienti ﬁcally meaningful and statistically signi ﬁcant
relation with an outcome. In predictive modeling, the
goal is to predict the probability of or the risk for the
presence (diagnosis) or future occurrence (prognosis) of
an outcome for an individual. When building a model
(explanatory or predictive), the variables selected for
inclusion should be based on the critical consideration of
relevant literature or knowledge of medical experts. Useof stepwise selection should be restricted to a limited
number of circumstances, such as during the initial
stages of developing a model, or if there is poor
knowledge of what variables might be predictive.
27
Modern shrinkage or penalization procedures such asLASSO/least absolute shrinkage and selection operator,
elastic net, and their variants are recommended for the
study of rare events or when there are a large number of
predictors. If predictive models are built, one shouldinclude some form of internal validation, such as cross-
validation or bootstrapping, particularly in the situation
that has no additional external validation performed.
Controlling for confounding when building a prediction
model is less common than that when modeling to
assess for associations/causality. The article by Kattan
and Gerds
28included in this supplemental issue of
CHEST offers guidance on building prediction models.
Reporting Considerations
We suggest that investigators report their cohort studies
following the Strengthening the Reporting of
Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE)
statement, which contains a checklist of 22 items that are
considered essential for reporting of observationalstudies.
29If multivariable prognostic prediction models
are developed in a cohort study to be used in predicting
future outcomes in individuals at risk, we recommend
that investigators consult the Transparent Reporting of a
multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis
or Diagnosis (TRIPOD) statement.30,31
Short List of Questions to Guide the Reviewer
When reviewing a cohort study, consider commenting
on the following:
1.The study cohort. Was the study cohort well
described? Was the method for selection of cohort
members and the inclusion/exclusion criteria
appropriate? Were there potential biases intro-
duced by the methods chosen? Was the sample
size adequate for the primary study question? Howwas subject dropout, death, and missing data
handled?
2.The exposures and outcomes. Were they clearly
deﬁned? Are there concerns about the accuracy of
their measurement? Were there potential biases
introduced by the de ﬁnitions and measurements?
3.Potential confounders. Were potential con-
founders identi ﬁed based on prior knowledge?
Were they properly controlled for in the studydesign and/or analysis? Are causal directed acyclic
graphs included or required?
4.The interpretation of the strength of the asso-
ciation(s) identi ﬁed.Were the measures used to
describe the association between the exposure and
the outcome clearly described and appropriate?
Was the interpretation of the association(s) iden-
tiﬁed appropriate?
chestjournal.org S77

Acknowledgments
Financial/non ﬁnancial disclosures: None declared.
References
1.Merrill RM. Introduction to Epidemiology . 7th ed. Burlington, MA:
Jones & Bartlett Publishers; 2015 .
2.Rothman KJ, Greenland S, Lash TL. Modern Epidemiology . 3rd ed.
Philadelphia, PA: Wolters Kluwer Health/Lippincott Williams &
Wilkins; 2012 .
3.Carlson MDA, Morrison RS. Study design, precision, and validity in
observational studies. J Palliative Med . 2009;12(1):77-82 .
4.Euser AM, Zoccali C, Jager KJ, Dekker FW. Cohort studies:
prospective versus retrospective. Nephron Clin Prac . 2009;113(3):
c214-c217 .
5.Vandenbroucke JP. Observational research, randomised trials, and
two views of medical science. PLoS Med . 2008;5(3):e67 .
6.Hess DR. Retrospective studies and chart reviews. Respir Care .
2004;49(10):1171-1174 .
7.Ernster VL. Nested case-control studies. Prev Med . 1994;23(5):587-
590.
8.Prentice RL. A case-cohort design for epidemiologic cohort studies
and disease prevention trials. Biometrika . 1986;73(1):1-11 .
9.Cai J, Zeng D. Sample size/power calculation for case –cohort studies.
Biometrics . 2004;60(4):1015-1024 .
10.Nijkeuter M, Söhne M, Tick LW, et al. The natural course of
hemodynamically stable pulmonary embolism: clinical outcome andrisk factors in a large prospective cohort study. Chest . 2007;131(2):
517-523 .
11.Short PM, Lipworth SIW, Elder DHJ, Schembri S, Lipworth BJ.
Effect of
bblockers in treatment of chronic obstructive pulmonary
disease: a retrospective cohort study. BMJ. 2011;342:d2549 .
12.Skull SA, Andrews RM, Byrnes GB, et al. Hospitalized community-
acquired pneumonia in the elderly: an Australian case-cohort study.
Epidemiol Infect . 2009;137(2):194-202 .
13.Altman DG. Practical Statistics for Medical Research . Boca Raton,
FL: CRC Press; 1990 .
14.Everitt BS. Statistical Methods for Medical Investigations . London,
England: Edward Arnold; 1994 .
15.Kahn HA, Sempos CT. Statistical Methods in Epidemiology . New
York, NY: Oxford University Press; 1989 .
16.Fleiss JL, Tytun A, Ury HK. A simple approximation for calculating
sample sizes for comparing independent proportions. Biometrics .
1980;36(2):343-346 .17.Kasiulevi /C20cius V, /C20Sapoka V, Filipavi /C20ci/C22ut_e R. Sample size
calculation in epidemiological studies. Gerontologija . 2006;7(4):
225-231 .
18.Woodward M. Formulae for sample size, power and minimum
detectable relative risk in medical studies. J R Stat Soc Ser D Stat .
1992;41(2):185-196 .
19.Wang X, Ji X. Sample size estimation in clinical research: from
randomized controlled trials to observational studies. Chest .
2020;158(suppl 1):S12-S20 .
20.Conato J, Shah N, Horwitz RI. Randomized, controlled trials,
observational studies, and the hierarchy of research design. N Engl J
Med. 2000;342:1887-1892 .
21.Hulley SB, Cummings SR, Browner WS, Grady DG, Newman TB.
Designing Clinical Research . 3rd ed. Philadelphia, PA: Lippincott
Williams & Wilkins; 2007 .
22.Wang X, Cheng Z. Cross-sectional studies: strengths, weaknesses,
and recommendations. Chest . 2020;158(suppl 1):S65-S71 .
23.Sullivan LM. Essentials of Biostatistics in Public Health . Burlington,
MA: Jones & Bartlett Learning; 2017 .
24.Rosenbaum PR, Rubin DB. The central role of the propensity
score in observational studies for causal effects. Biometrika . 1983;70(1):
41-55 .
25.Austin PC. An introduction to propensity score methods for
reducing the effects of confounding in observational studies.
Multivariate Behavio Res . 2011;46(3):399-424 .
26.Etminan M, Collins GS, Mansournia MA. Using causal diagrams to
improve the design and interpretation of medical research. Chest .
2020;158(suppl 1):S21-S28 .
27.Kattan MW, Vickers AJ. Statistical analysis and reporting guidelines
forChest .Chest . 2020;158(suppl 1):S3-S11 .
28.Kattan MW, Gerds TA. A framework for the evaluation of statistical
prediction models. Chest . 2020;158(suppl 1):S29-S38 .
29.von Elm E, Altman DG, Egger M, et al. The Strengthening the
Reporting of Observational Studies in Epidemiology (STROBE)
statement: guidelines for reporting observational studies. Int J Surg .
2014;12(12):1495-1499 .
30.Moons KG, Altman DG, Reitsma JB, et al. Transparent Reporting of
a multivariable prediction model for Individual Prognosis orDiagnosis (TRIPOD): explanation and elaboration. Ann Intern Med .
2015;162(1):W1-W73 .
31.Collins GS, Reitsma JB, Altman DG, Moons KG.
Transparent Reporting of a m ultivariable prediction
model for Individual Pr o g n o s i so rD i a g n o s i s
(TRIPOD): the TRIPOD statement. Ann Intern Med .
2015;162(1):55-63 .
S78 Supplement [158#1S CHEST JULY 2020 ]

