Clinical Trials scope – Blood Journal  
 
1 
 Reporting clinical trials in Blood  
 
Blood  welcomes submission of manuscripts reporting on clinical trials whether phase  
1, 2, 3 or 4. Reports should include a full description of the study design, patient 
population, methodology and conduct, and statistical plan. In all cases, the report will undergo peer review and will be evaluated for technical merit, novelty, clinical and 
scientific impact, and other measures to determine suitability for publication. Fast -
track peer review is offered for clinical trial studies that deserve to be brought out to the public with maximum expediency.  
 
As defined by the International Committe e of Medical Journal Editors  (ICMJE) 
(www.ICMJE.org
), a clinical trial is ‘any research project that prospectively assigns 
human subjects to intervention and comparison groups to study the cause -and-effect 
relationship  between a medical intervention and a health outcome’.  
 
Blood  follows the trial registration policy of the ICMJE  and considers only trials that 
have been registered before submission, and before the onset of patient enrollment . 
Acceptable registries must be ICMJE -approved (see more information in the section 
below).  
 
For authors reporting phase II and phase III rand omized controlled trials it is 
recommended to consult the CONSORT Statement and Checklist ( http://www.equator -
network.org/reporting -guidelines/consort -2010- statement -updated- guidelines -for-
reporting -parallel -group -randomised- trials/ ) to facilitate the complete and 
transparent reporting of trial findings. In addition, including a Patient Flow Diagram in the manuscript is recommended for randomized studies.  
  
 
Registration number and name of the trial registry must be provided at the end of the 
article abstract.  
 
Phase 1 studies  are welcome in Blood  provided the results are sufficiently novel, 
clinically or scientifically significant and of high impact to merit publication in Blood . 
Criteria that may determine suitability for publication include the following:  
• First-in-class molecules with important mechanistic information emerging from 
the study  
Clinical Trials scope – Blood Journal  
 
2 
 • Safety information that is novel and important for patient care  
• Important dosing, pharmacokinetic or pharmacodynamic information  
• Unexpected efficacy for the patient po pulation with a novel agent or a novel 
combination of agents  
• Ground -breaking information about the biology of the disease in question, 
including biomarker development, or about the mechanistic activity of a 
particular drug  
In all cases, phase 1 studies should have been completed and should have met the 
objectives based on the planned study design before they can be considered for publication.  
Phase 2 studies  are acceptable for publication with the following guidelines:  
• Results of a completed phase 2 study with proper design and sample size (as 
delineated in the statistical section) to answer an important clinical or biological 
question  
• An interim analysis may  be considered provided this is a planned interim 
analysis according to the design of the study and the results merit publication. This may include an unexpected or high level of efficacy, important safety information that may impact the use of the agent(s ) in question, or important 
biologic information learned from the study at the time the report is being proposed  
• Single -arm, uncontrolled studies can be considered provided the results are 
significant enough on their own (based on efficacy, safety or trans lational 
information). When historical cohorts are used for analysis, the statistical and 
scientific validity and design of such a comparison should be clearly described.  
Phase 3 studies  are welcome in Blood  with the following guidelines:  
• The results are presented after completion of the study as planned according to 
the statistical design of the protocol  
• Studies that are terminated early are acceptable for publication if a proper 
justification is provided for the early termination. Such justification may include a decision by a Data Safety Monitoring Board or regulatory authority. In these cases, this information should be added to the submission to support publication.  
Clinical Trials scope – Blood Journal  
 
3 
 • Interim analyses are generally only acceptable when planned according to the 
statistica l design of the trial and provided there is important new information 
generated that warrants release of early data. Proper description and 
justification of such scenarios needs to be included, and the report cannot 
represent only a subset analysis.  
Phase 4 studies  may be accepted for publication in Blood  if they meet the following 
criteria:  
• They provide important efficacy and/or safety information and are not merely 
confirmatory but provide important new insight into the disease and/or the treatment  
• They are properly designed and conducted in a prospective manner  
• Studies that provide important new data pertaining to survivorship are welcome  
Follow -up reports of previously published studies can be submitted to 
Blood  when the 
follow -up report provides addit ional new information not previously available. This 
may include the following: 
• Significant additional follow -up on a trial of a novel agent or combination of 
agents where the additional information is valuable to assess issues such as 
duration of response , survival, safety, etc. For a follow -up report to be 
acceptable, there has to be either a significant change in the efficacy or safety information, or it has to include clinically relevant prolonged follow -up 
information regarding response duration or survival as compared to any prior publication.  
• Long -term follow -up data that may provide valuable survivorship information 
(e.g., late complications, long -term survival, etc) or new insights into the 
disease or the drug(s)  
 
  
Clinical Trials scope – Blood Journal  
 
4 
  
Clinical trial registry  
In accordance with the guidelines published by the International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors (ICMJE) that all clinical trials be registered in one of five ICMJE -approved 
public trials registries (i.e., ClinicalTrials.gov, www.actr.org.au, www.ISRCTN.org , 
www.umin.ac.jp/ctr/index/htm , or www.trialregister.nl ). Trials must be registered at or 
before the onset of patient enrollment .  
In addition to accepting registration in any of the above five registries, Blood  will 
accept registration of clinical trials in any of the primary registers that participate in the WHO International Clinical Trial Registry Platform (ICTRP)  or in EudraCT
. 
Registration in a partner register only is insufficient.  
The ICMJE and Blood  implement the WHO definition of clinical trials for all trials that 
began enrollment on or after July 1, 2008 . This definition states that a clinical trial is 
"any res earch study that prospectively assigns human participants or groups of 
humans to one or more health- related interventions to evaluate the effects on health 
outcomes."  
Following ICMJE, Blood  will not consider results posted in the same clinical trials 
registry in which the primary registration resides to be previous publication if the 
results are presented in the form of a brief, structured (< 500 words) abstract or table.  
For more information, see ICMJE Uniform Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to 
Biomedical Journals .