International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements
for Pharmaceuticals for Human UseICH Q1: Stability Testing of Drug Substances 
and Drug Products
Step 2 document –to be released for comments
11 April 2025

2ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products
•This presentation is protected by copyright and may, with the exception of the ICH
logo, be used, reproduced, incorporated into other works, adapted, modified,
translated or distributed under a public license provided that ICH's copyright in the
presentation is acknowledged at all times. In case of any adaption, modification or
translation of the presentation, reasonable steps must be taken to clearly label,
demarcate or otherwise identify that changes were made to or based on the
original presentation. Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation
of the original presentation is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided.
•The presentation is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind. In no event shall
the ICH or the authors of the original presentation be liable for any claim, damages
or other liability arising from the use of the presentation.
•The above-mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third
parties. Therefore, for documents where the copyright vests in a third party,
permission for reproduction must be obtained from this copyright holder.Legal Notice

3HistoryICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products
•This document has been signed off as a Step 2
document (11 April 2025) to be issued by the ICH 
Regulatory Members for public consultation 
•This document was developed based on a Concept 
Paper (15 November 2022) and a Business Plan (15 
November 2022)

4Outline
These slides are intended to orient the reader/commentor with the revised 
stability guideline and provide guidance on commenting.  The slides are 
organised as follows:
Background on Revision
Milestones
Key Considerations
Recommendations for Guideline Review
Table of Contents for Draft Technical Document
Summary of Draft Guideline Content
Recommendations for Commenting
Instructions for CommentingICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

Background on Revision
Revision of the ICH Stability Guideline Series Q1A-
F and Q5C was recommended to:
a) Streamline the series by combining the various
guidelines into a single guideline focused on core
stability principles;
b) Promote harmonised interpretation by
addressing potential gaps and areas of ambiguity;
c) Address additional technical issues, including
relevant stability strategies and innovative tools
that strengthen the application of risk
management;
d) Consider inclusion of new topics, such as
stability considerations for advanced therapies.
The result will be a combined guideline, ICH Q1,
with integrated annexes that address specific topics
beyond the core principles on stability
recommendations and to address product type
specific recommendations.
ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

ICH Q1 Revision Milestones
Page 6Nov 2022
EWG Formation and 
Concept paper 
endorsed Jun 2023
Aligned upon critical 
comments on Early 
DraftMar 2024 
Send Step 1 draft for 
2.5-month 
constituency review
May 2023
Issued “Early Draft” 
for constituency 
Review/FeedbackOct 2023
Review and 
alignment, identify 
remaining gaps for 
Step 1 DraftJun 2024 
Start addressing 
comments to 
finalize Step 1
guideline2023Nov 2024 
Final 
Alignment March 2025  
Step 1 
2022 2024 2025
April 2025 
Step 2 Public 
Commenting 
Step 3
The Step 3 document is a draft technical document for public comment. Revisions will occur based on public commenting
Note: The Step 2 document is a draft Guideline for public comment. 
Revisions will occur based on public commenting.  
The document will undergo changes through Step 4 and should not be used 
or referenced as the final Guideline.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

7Key Considerations
combines and modernizes the content of ICH Q1A-F series and ICH Q5C into one 
comprehensive stability guideline, addressing a range of product types 
should be considered in its entirety for a comprehensive approach to stability studies
exemplifies the standard stability data package for regulatory submission for a range of 
product types and includes recommendations for studies managed within the 
Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS)
provides new content (e.g., in-use studies, short-term stability studies, processing and 
holding times, adjuvant and reference standard studies, product lifecycle and modelling)
enables science-and risk-based approaches and addresses new technologies and modern 
strategies as part of enhanced product understandingThe Q1 Draft Guideline:ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

8Recommendations for Draft Guideline Review
Read the entire Draft Guideline .  The EWG recommends that reviewers read the Draft 
Guideline in its entirety before providing detailed comments. The organisation of this 
guideline is different from the existing ICH stability guidelines. Content that may initially 
appear to be missing may be provided in a different section.
Keep guideline scope in mind. The scope of product types that this Draft Guideline 
covers is broad.  Guidance on all product-specific scenarios cannot be provided within the 
guideline.
The guideline exemplifies the standard approach , with strategies for alternative 
approaches . The core Draft Guideline focuses on assessing product stability using the 
concepts established within the ICH Q1 series and ICH Q5C.  Alternative approaches 
may be applied to any part of the guideline, when scientifically justified.  
Recognise that enhanced stability modelling is an evolving space . The guidance on 
this topic is written to enable application of current tools and future advancements.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

9ICH Q1 Step 2 Draft Guideline - Table of ContentsICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products
1. Introduction
2. Development Stability Studies Under Stress and Forced Conditions
3. Protocol Design for Formal Stability Studies
4. Selection of Batches
5. Container Closure System
6. Testing Frequency
7. Storage Conditions
8. Photostability
9. Stability Considerations for Processing and Holding Times for Intermediates
10. Short-Term Storage Conditions
11. In-Use Stability
12. Reference Materials, Novel Excipients and Adjuvants
13. Data Evaluation
14. Labelling
15. Stability Considerations for Commitments and Product Lifecycle Management
16. Glossary
17. References
18. Annexes
Annex 1:  Reduced Stability Protocol Design
Annex 2:  Stability Modelling
Annex 3:  Stability of Advanced Therapy Medicinal Products (ATMPs)

10Summary of ICH Q1 Draft Guideline Content
•Section 1 provides an introduction and is important for
understanding the scope of this guideline and how it differs in
format from existing stability guidelines. It is recommended to
read this section first and refer to it as needed throughout the
guideline review.
•Section 2 provides guidance on how data that is often
generated early in development (e.g., to understand intrinsic
stability, potential degradation products/pathways, confirm
method suitability, and enable method validation) may be used
to inform stability protocol design and support long term
storage. This section aims to consolidate content on stressed
stability and forced degradation currently existing in ICH Q1A
and/or ICH Q5C.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

11Summary of ICH Q1 Draft Guideline Content
•Sections 3-7 are intended to be used together to establish a long-
term stability protocol. These sections combine, align, clarify and
modernise content from ICH Q1A and ICH Q5C for primary stability
studies. The sections provide:
Specific guidance for primary stability protocols
Guidance on minimum data recommendations at submission,
attribute selection and identification of representative batches
Guidance on long-term and accelerated storage conditions
Clarity on where principles are applicable to other protocols,
such as stability commitments or those to support post-
approval changes.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

12Summary of Draft Guideline Content
Sections 8-11 provide guidance on stability studies intended to
supplement the primary stability study.
•Section 8 provides guidance on photostability that aligns with ICH Q1B
and informs the recommended storage conditions for the drug product.
The guidance in this section should be used in conjunction with the
guidance in Section 2.
•Section 9 provides stability recommendations for processing and
holding times for intermediates. Content in this section is new guidance
and articulates when data should be included in a regulatory
submission and when it may be managed within the PQS.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

13Summary of Draft Guideline Content
Sections 8-11 provide guidance on stability studies intended to supplement
the primary stability study.
•Section 10 is new content and provides guidance on studies to support
short-term storage conditions (which differ from in-use conditions) for
products that include this on the label. This section is not applicable to all
drug products.
•Section 11 is new content and provides guidance on studies to support
the in-use period and storage conditions for drug products.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

14Summary of Draft Guideline Content
•Section 12 is new content and provides guidance on how to
use the other sections of the ICH Q1 Draft Guideline with
respect to reference materials, novel excipients and
adjuvants.
•Section 13 provides guidance on data evaluation, including:
General considerations for assigning re-test period
and shelf life
Statistical evaluation, extrapolation and presentation of
data
Content is aligned with current ICH Q1E and should be
used in conjunction with Annex 2 when statistical
approaches are applied.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

15Summary of Draft Guideline Content
•Section 14 provides guidance on labelling and storage
statements and excursions outside of the labelling claim derived
from stability studies described throughout the guideline.
•Section 15 provides guidance on stability commitments for
product lifecycle management, including new guidance for post-
approval changes. Content on commitments is consistent with
ICH Q1A. Content on the introduction of new dosage forms is
consistent with ICH Q1C.
•Sections 16 & 17 are the glossary and referencesICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

16Summary of Draft Guideline Content
Section 18 includes 3 Annexes:
•Annex 1 includes guidance on bracketing and matrixing
currently captured in ICH Q1D. New guidance is provided on
knowledge and risk-based protocol reductions.
•Annex 2 provides guidance on stability modelling. It includes
guidance currently provided in ICH Q1E and new guidance on
using enhanced stability modelling.
•Annex 3 provides stability guidance on ATMPs (Advanced
Therapy Medicinal Products) which are new to ICH. This annex
is supplemental to the core ICH Q1 Draft Guideline and is not a
stand-alone guideline for ATMPs.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

17Recommendations for Commenting
Please do not provide duplicate 
comments through multiple 
organizations.Every comment requires resolution, and 
duplicate comments prolong the resolution 
process.
If a comment is considered critical, 
please indicate this within the 
comment (Column F) and provide a 
rationale.Reserve the classification of ‘critical’ for 
items that cannot be addressed through 
training or simple text revisions.
Please include recommendations for 
training material where a concern is 
too specific for the guideline or where 
further explanation is needed.Guideline recommendations address a 
wide range of product types and 
scenarios. Training may also address 
specific situations likely to be commonly 
encountered.ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

18CommentingProcess
The reviewer should follow the commenting process either per the ICH site or 
the regional authority they are sending their comments through.
Column B “Name of organisation or individual*”: this is set up as free text and is 
mandatory
Column C “Line from*”: this is set up to allow numbers only. If you want to 
submit a general comment, please enter 0 (zero).  This field is mandatory
Column D “Line to*”: If your comment applies to a single line, repeat the number 
of column C. This field is mandatory.
ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances and Drug Products

19Commenting Process
Column E “section number”: this is set up to allow numbers only. This is not 
mandatory but strongly encouraged.
Column F “Comment and rationale”: It is not possible to fill in this column if 
columns B, C and/or D are not filled in. An error message will appear if B, C 
and/or D are empty. This column has been set up as wide as possible to allow 
long comments (up to 32,767 characters).
Column G “Proposed changes/recommendation (if applicable)”: See column F.


Useful links
Page 20ICH Q1/Q5C Concept Paper:
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/ICH_Q1Q5C_ConceptPaper_Final_2022_1114.pdf
ICH Q1/Q5C Business Plan:
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/ICH_Q1Q5C_BusinessPaper_Final_2022_1028.pdf
ICH Q1/Q5C Work Plan: ICH_Q1Q5C_EWG_WorkPlan_2024_0930.pdf
ICH Quality Discussion Group (QDG) Reflection Paper  “ Future Opportunities & 
Modernization of ICH Quality Guidelines: Implementation of the ICH Quality Vision from 
the ICH Quality Reflection Paper ”
https://database.ich.org/sites/default/files/ICH_QDG_Recommendation_2021_1012.pdf

21Contact
•For any questions, please contact the ICH Secretariat: 
admin@ich.org ICH Q1: Stability Testing for Drug Substances 
and Drug Products

