E267
 https://doi.org/10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2022.63.2S3.2769J PREV MED HYG 2022; 63(SUPPL. 3): E267-E278
 OPEN ACCESS   
A clinical research requires a systematic approach with diligent 
planning, execution and sampling in order to obtain reliable and 
validated results, as well as an understanding of each research 
methodology is essential for researchers. Indeed, selecting an 
inappropriate study type, an error that cannot be corrected after 
the beginning of a study, results in flawed methodology. The results 
of clinical research studies enhance the repertoire of knowledge 
regarding a disease pathogenicity, an existing or newly discovered 
medication, surgical or diagnostic procedure or medical device. 
Medical research can be divided into primary and secondary 
research, where primary research involves conducting studies and 
collecting raw data, which is then analysed and evaluated in sec-ondary research. The successful deployment of clinical research 
methodology depends upon several factors. These include the type 
of study, the objectives, the population, study design, methodol-
ogy/techniques and the sampling and statistical procedures used. 
Among the different types of clinical studies, we can recognize 
descriptive or analytical studies, which can be further categorized 
in observational and experimental. Finally, also pre-clinical stud-
ies are of outmost importance, representing the steppingstone of 
clinical trials. It is therefore important to understand the types of 
method for clinical research. Thus, this review focused on various 
aspects of the methodology and describes the crucial steps of the 
conceptual and executive stages. Review
Methodology for clinical research
AYSHA KARIM KIANI1,2, ZAKIRA NAUREEN2,3, DEREK PHEBY4, GARY HENEHAN5, RICHARD BROWN6, PAUL SIEVING7, 
PETER SYKORA8, ROBERT MARKS9, BENEDETTO FALSINI10, NATALE CAPODICASA11, STANISLA V MIERTUS12,13, 
LORENZO LORUSSO14, DANIELE DONDOSSOLA15,16, GIANLUCA MARTINO TARTAGLIA17,18, MAHMUT CERKEZ ERGOREN19, 
MUNIS DUNDAR20, SANDRO MICHELINI21, DANIELE MALACARNE22, GABRIELE BONETTI22, KEVIN DONATO2, 
MARIA CHIARA MEDORI22,*, TOMMASO BECCARI23, MICHELE SAMAJA24, STEPHEN THADDEUS CONNELLY25, 
DONALD MARTIN26, ASSUNTA MORRESI27, ARIOLA BACU28, KAREN L. HERBST29, MYKHAYLO KAPUSTIN30, 
LIBORIO STUPPIA31, LUDOVICA LUMER32, GIAMPIETRO FARRONATO17,18, MATTEO BERTELLI2,22,33
INTERNATIONAL BIOETHICS STUDY GROUP**
1 Allama Iqbal Open University, Islamabad, Pakistan; 2 MAGI EUREGIO, Bolzano, Italy; 3 Department of Biological Sciences 
and chemistry, University of Nizwa, Oman; 4 Society and Health, Buckinghamshire New University, High Wycombe, UK;  
5 School of Food Science and Environmental Health, Technological University of Dublin, Dublin, Ireland; 6 Department of Psychology 
and Neuroscience, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, Canada; 7 Department of Ophthalmology, Center for Ocular 
Regenerative Therapy, School of Medicine, University of California at Davis, Sacramento, CA, USA; 8 Department of Philosophy 
and Applied Philosophy, University of St. Cyril and Methodius, Trnava, Slovakia; 9 Department of Biotechnology Engineering, Ben-
Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, Israel; 10 Institute of Ophthalmology, Università Cattolica del Sacro Cuore, Fondazione 
Policlinico Universitario A. Gemelli-IRCCS, Rome, Italy; 11 MAGI BALKANS, Tirana, Albania; 12 Department of Biotechnology, 
University of SS. Cyril and Methodius, Trnava, Slovakia; 13 International Centre for Applied Research and Sustainable Technology, 
Bratislava, Slovakia; 14 UOC Neurology and Stroke Unit, ASST Lecco, Merate, Italy; 15 Center for Preclincal Research and General 
and Liver Transplant Surgery Unit, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' Granda Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy;  
16 Department of Pathophysiology and Transplantation, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milan, Italy; 17 Department of Biomedical, 
Surgical and Dental Sciences, University of Milan, Milan, Italy; 18 UOC Maxillo-Facial Surgery and Dentistry, Fondazione IRCCS Ca' 
Granda, Ospedale Maggiore Policlinico, Milan, Italy; 19 Department of Medical Genetics, Faculty of Medicine, Near East University, 
Nicosia, Cyprus; 20 Department of Medical Genetics, Erciyes University Medical Faculty, Kayseri, Turkey; 21 Vascular Diagnostics 
and Rehabilitation Service, Marino Hospital, ASL Roma 6, Marino, Italy; 22 MAGI’S LAB, Rovereto (TN), Italy; 23 Department 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy; 24 MAGI GROUP, San Felice del Benaco (BS), Italy;  
25 San Francisco Veterans Affairs Health Care System, Department of Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery, University of California, 
San Francisco, CA, USA; 26 Univ. Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, Grenoble INP, TIMC-IMAG, SyNaBi, Grenoble, France;  
27 Department of Chemistry, Biology and Biotechnology, University of Perugia, Perugia, Italy; 28 Department of Biotechnology, 
University of Tirana, Tirana, Albania; 29 Total Lipedema Care, Beverly Hills California and Tucson Arizona, USA;  
30 Federation of the Jewish Communities of Slovakia; 31 Department of Psychological, Health and Territorial Sciences,  
School of Medicine and Health Sciences, University "G. d'Annunzio", Chieti, Italy; 32 Department of Anatomy and Developmental 
Biology, University College London, London, UK; 33 MAGISNAT, Peachtree Corners (GA), USA
Keywords
Study design • Clinical research • Observational studies • Experimental studies • Bias
Summary
** International Bioethics Study Group: Derek Pheby, Gary Henehan, Richard Brown, Paul Sieving, Peter Sykora, Robert Marks, Benedetto Falsini, 
Natale Capodicasa, Stanislav Miertus, Lorenzo Lorusso, Gianluca Martino Tartaglia, Mahmut Cerkez Ergoren, Munis Dundar, Sandro Michelini, Daniele 
Malacarne, Tommaso Beccari, Michele Samaja, Matteo Bertelli, Donald Martin, Assunta Morresi, Ariola Bacu, Karen L. Herbst, Mykhaylo Kapustin, 
Liborio Stuppia, Ludovica Lumer, Giampietro Farronato.

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E268
Introduction
According to epistemologists, who study the nature, ori-
gin and scope of knowledge, epistemic justification, the 
rationality of belief and related issues [1], there are six 
ways to obtain knowledge:
• authoritarianism;
• mysticism;
• rationalism and empiricism;
• pragmatism;
• scepticism.
Rationalism and empiricism, pragmatism and scepticism 
may be within the scope of the scientific method, whereas 
authoritarianism and mysticism are clearly pseudoscience 
or anti-science [2]. Science is characterized by systematic 
observation and experimentation, inductive and deductive 
reasoning, and the formation and testing of hypotheses 
and theories. The details of how these are carried out can 
vary greatly, but these characteristics are sufficient to dis-
tinguish scientific activity from non-science [3-8] 
The choice and selection of a particular methodology 
depends on factors such as the hypothesis to investigate, 
the research question or statement of the problem, the 
objectives, the nature of the study, the study population 
and controls, intervention and variables [9-12]. The re-
liability and validity of the results therefore depend on 
an overall study design having well-defined objectives, 
reproducible methodology, diligent data collection and 
analysis to minimise errors and bias, and efficient re-
porting of the findings [9, 12]. Selecting an appropriate 
methodology is therefore essential to obtain valid re-
sults, and an understanding of research methodology is 
essential for researchers.
Medical research can be broadly categorised into primary 
and secondary research. Primary research involves con-
ducting studies and collecting raw data that is then an-
alysed and evaluated in secondary research [13]. Prima-
ry research can be further classified into three types as 
shown in Figure 1: basic or laboratory studies, also known 
as preclinical studies, clinical research, and epidemiolog-
ical research. Both clinical and epidemiological research 
involve observational and experimental methods. Clinical 
research investigates the effects of specific interventions 
on individuals, while epidemiological research studies the 
causes and distribution of disease or mortality in human 
populations, especially the effects of exposure to single 
or multiple environmental agents [14]. Similar in essence, 
clinical research methods differ somewhat, depending 
on the type of study. Type is an integral element of study 
design and depends on the research question to answer. 
It should be specified before the start of any study [15]. 
Selecting an inappropriate study type results in flawed 
methodology, and if it occurs after commencement of the 
study, it is an error that cannot corrected. 
Stages of clinical research 
A clinical research project consists broadly of two stag-
es: planning and action [16]. Planning Stage
The planning stage consists of all the preliminary pa-
perwork and search of the literature done before starting 
actual research. It includes identifying the problem, re-
viewing the literature, developing a research question, 
formulating a hypothesis, determining the type of study, 
selecting a study design, identifying the target/study 
population, and seeking informed consent to participa-
tion. It also includes establishing collaborations with 
experts and determining the overall feasibility of the 
proposed work [9, 16].
Before beginning the scientific investigation, the re-
searchers should decide the data collection strategy, sam-
pling techniques and statistical analysis. After choosing 
a working hypothesis and reformulating it as null and 
alternative hypotheses, the next step is to decide the type 
of study required to answer the research question and an 
appropriate method to implement it.
Action stage
This stage includes the actionable research, implemen-
tation of the method in coherence with the theoretical 
concept, randomisation, blinding, application of sam-
pling techniques, data collection and statistical analy-
sis [10, 11].
Classification of clinical research
Depending on the study design, clinical research can in 
principle be categorised as either quantitative or qualita-
tive [9]. Further classification of clinical research meth-
ods may be based on data collection techniques and the 
direction of causality being investigated, as illustrated 
for example by time relationships. Clinical research can 
be classified as either descriptive or analytical, as illus-
trated in Figure 2 [9, 12, 17-20]. 
Descriptive research
Descriptive studies record and report unusual or new 
events, e.g. the prevalence of a disease or syndrome in 
a family, and correlate the events with possible expla-
Fig. 1. Types of primary medical research.

METHODOLOGY FOR CLINICAL RESEARCHE269
nations. This type of research is neither randomized nor 
pre-designed, and is presented as a case report, case se-
ries or surveillance study.
Case Reports
These are reports of individual patients with particular 
clinical characteristics. Such reports present baseline 
characteristics recorded and evaluated for single patients, 
compared with population values. Sometimes these stud-
ies may consist of observations recorded for administra-
tion of a certain treatment to an individual. They are es-
sentially hypothesis generating, opening the way for more 
rigorous studies of an experimental nature [12]. 
Case series
Case series may include examination of successive clin-
ical cases having common characteristics. They may, for 
example, present observations from patients exposed to a 
particular drug or group of drugs at regular intervals, and 
may include former histories of patients having similar 
outcomes, to detect possible cause-effect relationships.Surveillance studies
This type of study involves continuous monitoring of 
disease occurrence in a population. Information related 
to a health problem of interest is collected in databas-
es, analysed over a time period and inferences are made 
based on observed correlations.
Analytical/explanatory studies
The most significant difference between descriptive and 
analytical studies is the presence in the latter of control 
groups that enable comparative evaluations to be made. 
Analytical clinical studies can be further classified into 
experimental (intervention) studies and observational 
(non-intervention) studies. 
Observational studies 
Observational studies are non-intervention studies in 
which patients are prescribed a specified therapy based 
on diagnosis and therapeutic need. They include thera-
peutic, prognostic, observational drug studies, second-
ary data analyses, case series and single case reports, 
Fig. 2: Classification of clinical research.

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E270
and may be retrospective, prospective or ambidirection-
al [21]. In non-intervention studies, “knowledge from the 
treatment of persons with drugs in accordance with the 
instructions for use specified in their registration is ana-
lysed using epidemiological methods” [21]. “Diagnosis, 
treatment and monitoring are not performed according 
to a previously specified study protocol, but exclusively 
according to medical practice” [21].
Observational studies involve collecting data pertaining 
to study participants in their natural or real-world en-
vironments. They are usually diagnostic and prognostic 
studies, with a cross-sectional approach to data collec-
tion. The comparative-effectiveness study is the hall-
mark of non-experimental research [22], and involves 
comparison of comparable groups to interpret outcome 
effects. Such studies are also known as benchmark-
ing-controlled trials because of the element of peer com-
parison [22]. 
Observational studies can be broadly categorised into 
individual and aggregate studies.
Aggregate observation studies
Individual level data aggregated by geographic area, 
year or any other parameter is termed aggregate data. 
Aggregate studies are conducted to record observations 
on pandemics and epidemics of communicable diseas-
es and their treatment regimens, for example aggregate 
data on COVID-19 in a particular country, or the oc-
currence and effective treatment of malaria and its re-
lapse in a particular geographical area. Data pertaining 
to non-communicable diseases is also aggregated in the 
same way to generate insights into the distribution of 
diseases in specified populations, as for example in can-
cer registries [23, 24]. 
Individual observation studies
Individual studies are based on disaggregated individ-
ual results and involve analysis to estimate differences 
between subgroups. In individual observational studies, 
subjects are observed individually and then gathered in 
groups based on outcomes or exposures or both. Based 
on grouping criteria, individual observational studies 
may take the form of case-control, cohort or cross-sec-
tional studies.
a. Case-control studies
 Individual observational studies that involve group-
ing of subjects based on selected outcomes are 
termed case-control studies. In these studies, the ex-
posure experience of the case group (subjects with 
the outcome of interest) is compared with that of the 
control group (subjects without the outcome), for in-
stance occurrence or non-occurrence of renal failure 
in diabetic patients or heart attacks in hypertensive 
patients. The design of such studies is retrospective 
and evaluates possible associations between expo-
sures and outcome. They are quick and inexpensive 
to perform, and the results are expressed as odds ra-
tios (OR) and risk ratio/relative risk. Case control 
studies enable multiple exposure variables to be ex-
amined for a given outcome, but they do not allow correlation of sequential causes and effects with the 
outcome [12].
b. Cohort studies
 In this type of study subjects are grouped based on 
exposure. Cohort studies enable multiple outcomes 
to be studied for a given exposure. The exposure is 
well-defined, but the outcome may vary, thus pro-
viding an opportunity to monitor many outcomes of 
a single exposure [12]. Cohort studies can be retro-
spective, where the cohorts are defined on the basis 
of a past exposure, or prospective, where the cohorts 
are defined by a current exposure. 
• Retrospective cohort studies
 In retrospective cohort observational studies, the 
researchers look back in time at archived or self-re-
ported data in order to compare outcomes in exposed 
and non-exposed patients. The two groups are iden-
tified retrospectively and studied prospectively. This 
type of study is quick and inexpensive [25, 26], but is 
prone to recall-bias [27].
• Prospective cohort studies
 A prospective cohort study is a longitudinal cohort 
study in which cohorts differing in exposure to the 
factors being studied are followed up at predeter -
mined time intervals to determine the effect on out-
comes. This type of study helps to determine associ-
ations between a particular exposure and outcomes. 
For rare outcomes, large numbers of subjects and 
long follow-up periods are required, so such studies 
tend to be very expensive. In addition, if random-
ization and blinding are not conducted properly, the 
chances of bias and confounders increases [26]. 
c. Cross-sectional studies
 Cross-sectional studies have transverse study design 
and involve concurrent assessment of exposures and 
outcomes without any follow-up. These studies are 
essentially based on surveys, and are therefore ap-
propriate for determining prevalence but cannot shed 
light on causation [12, 26]. 
Experimental studies
Experimental studies are intervention studies, and in-
clude preclinical trials on animals as well as clinical 
trials in humans. In these studies, the effect of an inter -
vention is compared with that of another intervention or 
a placebo. Interventions studied may include, for exam-
ple, use of medical devices, surgical, physical or psy-
chotherapeutic procedures, psychosocial interventions, 
rehabilitation measures, acupuncture, physiotherapy 
training or diet [1, 14]. Experimental studies mostly aim 
to compare outcomes of treatment procedures in a group 
of patients exhibiting minimal internal differences. To 
avoid bias, patients are randomly allocated to treatment 
and control groups. Different countries have different 
procedures and legal and ethical requirements govern-
ing the conduct of such studies. For instance, the United 
Kingdom Medicines and Medical Devices Act 2021 re-
quires that studies using medical devices be registered 
by the relevant authorities. In the European Union, inter -
ventional studies must be conducted in accordance with 

METHODOLOGY FOR CLINICAL RESEARCHE271
the binding rules of Good Clinical Practice (GCP) [28]. 
In Germany, vaccine studies are considered to be inter -
vention studies and are conducted as clinical studies ac-
cording to the AMG [13]. Likewise, drug studies must 
seek approval from ethical committees. Informed con-
sent must be obtained from the patient and an ethically 
defensible control group included. The control group 
is given another treatment regimen and/or placebo and 
should enable the central questions of the study to be 
answered [28]. 
Some experimental studies in biomedical research may 
focus on possible biomarkers, such as enzymes or genes, 
on evaluation of imaging techniques, such as magnet-
ic resonance imaging and computed tomography, or on 
techniques such as gene sequencing in order to find cor -
relations between genotypes and phenotypes. The devel-
opment of statistical tests and mathematical models may 
also be regarded as experimental studies. Generally, the 
design of biomedical studies should be based on their 
purpose and objectives [13].
Design of experimental studies
The design of an experimental study depends on the type 
of information sought, the objectives of the study and 
the ultimate application. Designs can be characterized 
by interventions on selected groups of the study popu-
lation under controlled environmental conditions com-
pared with a control group without any interventions. 
The main designs employed in experimental studies 
are randomised controlled trials and non-randomised 
clinical trials, also known as quasi-experimental stud-
ies [9, 12, 26].
Non-randomized studies
In non-randomised studies, the study population is se-
lected on the basis of pre-determined selection criteria; 
it is not randomized with respect to treatment(s) but is 
prescribed treatment based on the course of the disease. 
In many experimental studies involving surgical inter -
vention which is only appropriate for particular patient 
groups, randomization is either not possible or not eth-
ical. Generally, phase IV of a clinical trial has non-ran-
domized design. Non-randomised studies can be further 
categorised as:
a. Quasi-experiment 
 The investigator assigns exposure to the intervention 
as in a randomized controlled trial, but the subjects 
are not randomized [12]. 
b. Field trial 
 These are large scale studies of therapeutic interven-
tions, for example the efficacy of COVID-19 vac-
cines in combatting COVID-19. Many samples are 
required to determine efficacy, particularly when the 
incidence of a particular disease in the population is 
low [26]. 
c. Community trial 
 In these trials, treatments are allocated to a commu-
nity group. For instance, the effect of fluoridation of 
water was tested by exposing some communities to fluoride and comparing outcomes with those in unex-
posed communities. 
Randomized controlled trials
Randomised controlled trials (RCTs) are trials in which 
the subjects are randomly assigned to experimental and 
control groups. The experimental group is given the 
treatment that is being tested and the control group is 
given an alternative treatment or a placebo or no treat-
ment at all. Most experimental clinical studies are RCTs, 
and the subjects are either healthy volunteers or patients. 
After a new drug passes a pre-clinical trial, it is tested 
via RCTs. Various aspects of the RCT require careful 
consideration before the trial begins, for example study 
design, patient population, control group selection, ran-
domization, sampling, blinding or open labelling of 
treatments and outcomes [12, 26]. 
a. Study design
 Study design is an important prerequisite for the suc-
cess of the study. Randomised controlled trials com-
monly use parallel group design, matched pairs and 
cross-over designs [29]. 
• Parallel group design
 This design requires large number of subjects/pa-
tients who are enrolled, followed up and observed for 
outcomes on a parallel basis over a period of time. 
• Matched pairs
 In this design, patients are matched for different vari-
ables. Matched subjects are assigned at random to 
intervention or control groups. Although this type of 
design is difficult to conduct, it helps overcome the 
influence of confounding variables on outcomes.
• Crossover design 
 This design is used for drugs having reversible and tran-
sient effects. The effects of two interventions, adminis-
tered sequentially, are assessed. The number of patients 
required is smaller than for the other designs [29].
b. Patient population
 In RCTs, the patient population is selected on the 
basis of predetermined selection criteria. This se-
lection is carried out to avoid confounding variables 
and should be based on predefined inclusion and ex-
clusion criteria. Withdrawal criteria, indicating the 
circumstances under which subjects should be with-
drawn from the trial, should also be predefined.
• Inclusion criteria
 The criteria for selection of subjects (patients or 
healthy volunteers) are based on age, body mass in-
dex, gender, ethnicity, prognostic factors and diag-
nostic admission criteria. They are used to select the 
subjects and then randomly assign them to various 
treatments for comparison of outcomes [26, 30].
• Exclusion criteria
 These are criteria for excluding subjects from a par -
ticular trial, for example severity of disease, concur -
rent medication, allergies, underlying health condi-
tions and many more [30].
• Withdrawal criteria
These indicate situations in which the trial is terminat-
ed for particular subjects and specify how and when the 

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E272
subjects should be withdrawn from the study. When sub-
jects are withdrawn, they are no longer subject to fol-
low-up. 
c. Control group
 Perhaps the most important factor in any scientific 
research is identification and determination of a con-
trol group. Without successful deployment of a con-
trol group, a study cannot be authentic. Randomised 
controlled trials can include placebo, no-treatment, 
historical or active controls [26]. 
• Placebo control
 A placebo is a fake or inert version of the drug under 
evaluation, with no pharmacological effect. Placebos 
help overcome any psychological impact of drug dis-
pensing on disease progression, allowing the investi-
gator to estimate the effectiveness of a treatment free 
from confounding psychological factors. However, 
placebo controls in drug research and sham surgery 
are ethically controversial, especially in cases where 
an effective treatment exists.
• No treatment controls
 This is the least preferred type of control, where sub-
jects are not given anything by way of treatment, not 
even a placebo. Such controls serve as a neutral refer -
ence group for the experimental groups receiving the 
treatment under investigation. This approach avoids 
bias due to psychological factors that may influence 
outcomes. 
• Historical control 
 In some studies, concurrent controls are dispensed 
with and only historical control data is used. This is 
done specifically for studies involving rare diseases 
with high mortality. In such circumstances, with-
holding treatment from a control group would raise 
very considerable ethical implications [9]. Historical 
controls are controls used in previous studies. They 
help reduce the overall cost of the study, making drug 
developers more likely to invest. Historical controls 
also make enrolment in rare disease trials more feasi-
ble by reducing the number of patients required. 
d. Randomization Randomization is the optimal method of allocating 
subjects to the therapy arms of a trial. Random as-
signment of subjects to the treatment and control 
groups ensures equal distribution of all variables 
and confounding factors, such as genetic variabil-
ities, risk factors and comorbidities, in all groups, 
thereby alleviating bias. Randomization is intended 
to ensure comparability between the groups, and it 
reduces the chance of allocating a specific therapy 
to patients with a particularly favourable prognosis. 
Randomization is carried out using random number 
tables, mathematical algorithms for pseudorandom 
number generation, physical randomization devices 
such as coins and cards, or sophisticated devices such 
as electronic random number indicator equipment [9-
12, 26]. 
 The main randomization techniques used in RCTs 
are simple randomization, cluster randomization and 
stratified randomization [31]. 
• Simple randomization
 Randomization involving a single sequence of ran-
dom assignments is known as simple randomization. 
It randomizes patients selected on the basis of selec-
tion criteria to various treatment groups. 
• Cluster randomization 
 Cluster-randomized trials are used to compare treat-
ments that are allocated to clusters (groups) of sub-
jects, rather than to individuals. Groups of patients 
matching the selection criteria are randomly assigned 
to the group receiving the treatment or to a control 
group. Randomised controlled trials are used to eval-
uate complex interventions. 
• Stratified randomization 
 This is a two-step procedure. As the name indi-
cates, the subjects entering the clinical trial are first 
grouped in strata (groups) based on clinical features 
that might affect the outcome of their condition, and 
then undergo intra-group randomization to assign 
them to various treatment groups.
e. Sampling method 
 Sampling is the process of selecting a sample popula-
tion from the target population. Sampling allows in-
Fig. 3. Sampling methods in clinical research.

METHODOLOGY FOR CLINICAL RESEARCHE273
formation to be obtained about the target population 
based on statistical analysis of a subset of the popula-
tion, without any need to investigate the characteris-
tics of every individual in the target population [32]. 
Sampling techniques are broadly categorised into 
probability and non-probability sampling, as shown 
in Figure 3.
• Probability sampling
 In this sampling technique, every element of the pop-
ulation has an equal chance of being selected. This 
helps create a sample truly representative of a given 
population [22]. Types of probability sampling tech-
niques are:
Simple random sampling
In this type of sampling every experimental unit has an 
equal chance of being selected during sampling.
Systematic sampling 
This sampling is used where a complete and up-to-date 
sampling frame is available. The first experimental unit 
is selected randomly, while the rest are selected random-
ly based on a predesigned pattern. 
Stratified sampling
In this method the study population is divided into strata 
according to age, gender etc. and then sampling is car -
ried out from these strata. 
Cluster sampling
In this method the study population is divided into clus-
ters and these clusters rather than individuals are taken 
as sampling units. The clusters are then randomly select-
ed for inclusion in the study.
Multistage sampling
Multistage random sampling is conducted at several 
stages within population clusters. This sampling method 
is usually applied to large nationwide surveys. 
Multiphase sampling
The sampling is conducted in two or more phases. In the 
first phase some data is collected from the whole sample 
and in the second, data is collected from a subset of the 
original sample. 
• Non-probability sampling
 In this type of sampling technique, not all experimen-
tal units get an equal chance of being selected [22]. 
A non-representative sample which does not produce 
generalizable results is a possible result. Different 
types of non-probability sampling are:
Convenience sampling
This sampling is based on the convenience of the inves-
tigator. 
Purposive/judgemental/selective/subjective sampling
This type is based on the judgement of the investigator.
Quota sampling
This method of sampling is used in studies involving 
interviews and is based on the judgment of the inter -
viewers, depending on characteristics such as sex and 
physical status.
f. Blinding
 Blinding is defined as “concealing or masking the as-
signment of subjects to a study group from the partic-
ipants of the study, i.e., patients/subjects, observers and researchers”. Randomised clinical trials may be 
blinded or non-blinded [9, 12, 26]. 
• Non-blinded experiments
 Non-blinded experiments are also known as open-la-
bel studies. In this type of study, all participating pa-
tients, physicians, observers and researchers know 
the treatment used. This may result in bias, but is 
unavoidable where hiding a treatment raises ethical 
concerns. For instance, it is unethical to hide the 
treatment regime from patients with cancer, AIDS or 
organ failure. Patients may also be allowed to select 
the drug brand themselves.  
• Blinded experiments
 In these experiments the blinding is done at the start 
of the experiment. Blinding can be single, double or 
triple. 
Single-blind trials
The subjects (patients or healthy volunteers) do not 
know whether they are in the intervention or the placebo 
group. 
Double-blind trials
Neither the subjects nor the researcher knows who has 
been assigned to the control and the test groups. Only 
the observer knows to which group the subjects have 
been assigned. 
Triple-blind trials
In triple blind RCTs, personal or intentional bias is 
eliminated by none of the study participants (subjects, 
observer, researcher) knowing the label or nature of the 
treatment administered. 
The information identifying treatment and subjects in 
double- and triple-blind experiments is held by another 
party and only made available to the researcher at the 
end of the trial. 
Prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded-endpoint 
(PROBE) trials
Randomized controlled trials can be conducted as 
PROBE trials in which patients are randomly assigned 
to different treatment regimens and both patients and 
researchers are aware of the treatments administered. 
The PROBE trial is much easier to conduct than dou-
ble- or triple-blind or doubled-blind placebo-controlled 
design, as it enables trials to be performed in conditions 
that resemble real-world practice. It is also economical 
and simplifies patient enrolment. However, it impos-
es certain conditions to avoid the bias associated with 
open label trials. PROBE designs are endpoint blinded, 
as the observer is unaware of the treatment being used. 
Since the subjects and researchers know the treatments, 
potential bias can be avoided by using so-called hard 
endpoints as primary endpoints. However, the results 
obtained by PROBE are less reliable than those obtained 
by double- or triple-blind studies [33].
g. Treatment considerations
 Another important prelude to a successful clinical 
study is the selection of treatment dosage, form, fre-
quency, route of administration and concurrent med-
ications for the test and active control groups. A drug 
may be available in various doses and in forms such 
as tablet, capsule or injectable. Since these factors 

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E274
affect the plasma concentrations and effects of the 
drug, and ultimately the outcome; all these factors, 
except dose and frequency, are maintained constant 
throughout the study. If necessary, the dose and fre-
quency of the drug may be changed gradually and 
sequentially. If the treatments involve more than one 
drug, their pharmacokinetic and pharmacodynamic 
interactions are kept under observation while deter -
mining dosage, in order to avoid any influence of 
these interactions on outcomes [9, 12, 33]. Another 
important consideration in treatment selection is pa-
tient compliance, since non-compliance may have 
adverse effects on outcome.
h. Outcome measures
 Since the objectives of a clinical study indicate the 
possible outcomes, this is borne in mind in select-
ing the methods of monitoring and the data required 
for recording the outcomes of interest. In clinical 
experiments, outcomes are assessed in terms of ef-
ficacy endpoints, i.e. primary endpoints and surro-
gate or secondary endpoints. Primary endpoints are 
measures specified by the researcher at the start of 
the study in order to verify or refute the hypothesis, 
whereas surrogate endpoints are specified before 
commencement of the study but can be modified 
during its course. For instance, in an experiment 
estimating the efficacy of an antihypertensive drug, 
the primary endpoint would be to see whether or not 
the treatment reduces cardiovascular events, while 
a surrogate endpoint could be its ability to reduce 
blood pressure [26]. Many primary and secondary 
endpoints are prespecified before beginning a study. 
However, the main primary endpoint is the quality of life afforded by a particular treatment for individuals 
in the study group. 
• Bias, chicanery and confounders
 Bias is distortion of outcomes due to introduction of 
errors, voluntarily or involuntarily, at different stages 
of the research, e.g. the stages of design, population 
selection, calculation of number of samples, data en-
try and statistical analysis. Several types of bias can 
occur during clinical research (Tab. I).
Chicanery
Chicanery involves deliberate unethical changes to inter -
ventions, results and the data of patients. Copying data 
from other sources is also classified as chicanery. 
Confounders
Confounders are factors, other than those being studied, 
that can affect an outcome parameter. These factors are 
not directly relevant to the research question but may 
possibly alter the outcomes [10, 11]. For example, while 
studying the effect of hypertension on renal failure, di-
abetes could be a confounder as it also affects kidney 
function. It is therefore essential to take all potential 
confounders into consideration when designing a study. 
If known, confounders can be controlled for by selection 
constraints or statistical adjustments, such as stratifica-
tion and mathematical modelling, during study design. 
Various strategies are used during data analysis to adjust 
for confounders; these include stratified analysis using 
the Mantel-Haenszel method, a matched design ap-
proach, data restriction and model fitting using regres-
sion techniques [34].
Bias, chicanery and confounders can be avoided by ran-
domization and blinding. The randomized controlled and 
blinded clinical trial with case number planning is there-
Tab. I. Types of bias in clinical research.
Type of Bias Description
Investigator biasConscious or unconscious preference given to one group over another by the 
investigator 
Evaluator biasIntroduced when an investigator making endpoint-variable measurements favours one 
group over another. Common with subjective endpoints
Performance bias/ set of 
Hawthorne effectsIntroduced when participants know their allocation to a particular group and change 
their response or behaviour during a particular treatment
Selection biasIntroduced when samples (individuals or groups) are selected for data analysis without 
proper randomization; includes admission bias and non-response bias, in which case the 
sample is not representative of the population
Ascertainment or information biasErrors in measurement or classification of patients; includes diagnostic bias and recall 
bias 
Allocation biasSystematic differences in the allocation of participants to treatment groups and 
comparison groups, when the investigator knows which treatment is going to be 
allocated to the next eligible participant
Confirmation bias Information is processed in a manner consistent with someone’s belief 
Belief biasThe strength of arguments is judged on the basis of the plausibility of their conclusions 
rather than how strongly they support that conclusion.
Expectation biasIntroduced during publication by a personal preference for positive results over negative 
results when the results deviate from expected outcomes
Detection biasSystematic errors in observation of outcomes in different groups results in detection bias 
when outcomes in one group are not as vigilantly sought as in the other.
Attrition bias/loss-to-follow-up bias Preferential loss-to-follow-up in a particular group leads to attrition bias.
Commercial biasIntroduced for commercial reasons in the form of advertising or economic pressure on 
editors, particularly in studies involving new medical devices and drugs

METHODOLOGY FOR CLINICAL RESEARCHE275
fore accepted as the gold standard for evaluating the ef-
ficacy and safety of drugs and therapeutic regimes [35].
i. Validity
 The results of a clinical trial are said to be valid if the 
differences observed between the study and control 
groups are real and not influenced by bias or con-
founders (internal validity) and are applicable to a 
broader population (external validity). Placebo-con-
trolled, double-blinded, randomised clinical trials 
have high internal validity, while external validity 
can be increased by broadening the eligibility criteria 
for enrolling subjects [36].
Preclinical studies for the development 
of biomedical products
Pre-clinical (or laboratory) studies form the basis of 
clinical trials. To reduce the time for, and to improve the 
chances of approval of a new drug, the choice of an ap-
propriate preclinical model is of utmost importance. Pre-
clinical studies evaluate the pharmacodynamics, phar -
macokinetics and toxicology of a drug in in vitro and in 
vivo settings. Clinical trials are conducted when preclin-
ical studies have demonstrated the efficacy and safety 
of a new drug. The results of clinical trials can improve 
preclinical studies and vice versa. Nonetheless, only a 
small fraction of drugs that pass the preclinical evalu-
ation criteria are selected for clinical trials, and only a 
few are approved for use in humans, so optimization of 
standard preclinical procedures to mimic the complexity 
of human disease mechanisms is urgently needed [37].
In summary, preclinical studies involve the use of vari-
ous in vivo and in vitro models and computer designs to 
evaluate the efficacy and safety of a new drug.
In vitro  models (cell studies) 
Advances in cell culture technology have made it possi-
ble to test new drugs on cell lines grown in vitro. These 
studies may involve testing of drugs on human or animal 
cancer cells [38].
In vivo  models (animal studies) 
Drugs that prove effective in vitro are then tested in 
vivo in live animals to ensure their safety in living sys-
tems. Animal models, and their critical validation, are 
of great importance in minimizing unpredicted adverse 
effects of a drug in clinical trial phases. Animal models 
are carefully selected on the basis of their advantages 
and limitations and on the objectives of the study, in 
order to mimic pathophysiological conditions in hu-
mans [38]. The validity of animal models is increased 
by following the relevant guidelines and standards in 
designing a study. Three types of models are used in 
preclinical studies:
Homologous models
Homologous models are animals which have the same 
causes, symptoms, and treatments of a particular disease 
that humans would have.Isomorphic models
These animals have same symptoms and treatments of a 
particular disease as humans, but the cause may be dif-
ferent.
Predictive models
These models are only like humans in some aspects of a 
particular disease; however they provide useful informa-
tion about the mechanisms of disease features. 
In silico  models (computer studies)
In silico models are based on computer simulations that 
complement or precede in vitro and in vivo studies. They 
predict how a drug might behave in these subsequent 
studies. In-silico studies require expertise in biochem-
istry, molecular biology, cheminformatics, and bioinfor -
matics [38].
Pre-clinical studies provide useful information about 
the behaviour and safety of drugs. However, drugs do 
not necessarily behave in the same way in humans as 
they do in animal models. For example, human sub-
jects and mice models differ sharply in absorption, 
processing, and excretion of certain drugs. Unexpected 
side-effects may therefore occur in humans that do not 
occur in animal models. Drugs which show promis-
ing outcomes in preclinical studies are then approved 
for testing in human subjects by regulatory authorities 
such as the Food and Drug Administration (FDA) in the 
US [37, 38]. 
Design, performance, and monitoring 
of clinical trials
Once preclinical studies on a new drug are completed 
and promising results are achieved, the next stage in 
biomedical research is testing the safety, efficacy and 
reproducibility of the drug’s action on humans through 
clinical trials. Clinical trials are considered to be a safe 
and dependable method of evaluating the efficacy of a 
treatment. Clinical trials may be therapeutic or preven-
tive [37-39].
Therapeutic trials
These trials are conducted to test experimental treat-
ments, combinations of new or existing drugs, and new 
surgical interventions.
Preventive trials 
These trials test the efficacy of interventions (drugs, vac-
cines) in preventing diseases and their outcomes. 
In general, clinical trials aim to enhance the repertoire 
of information related to an intervention or lifestyle 
regime that might prove beneficial for patient manage-
ment or treatment. They are designed to develop and test 
new diagnostic methods or treatments and their effects 
on humans, or new uses of existing diagnostic methods 
or treatment. They also help identify the most cost-ef-
fective and risk-free diagnostic methods or treatments. 

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E276
Randomized controlled trials are conducted to compare 
the safety and efficacy of two or more interventions in 
humans, and can often be based on clinical equipoise. 
Their phases [26] are shown in Table II.
Good clinical practice: guidelines 
and requirements
Clinical trials are the gold standard for evaluating the 
superiority or similarity of new drugs or surgical pro-
cedures with respect to existing ones. As clinical trials 
involve testing on humans, their design and conduct re-
quire careful planning, diligent execution and enormous 
resources to comply with regulations set by the regula-
tory authorities so that robust results can be attained. 
The good clinical practice (GCP) guidelines published 
by the International Council of Harmonization (ICH) 
is an international ethical standard that ensures that the 
design, conduct, performance, monitoring, auditing, 
recording, analysis and reporting of clinical trials takes 
place according to established values. It also ensures 
the reliability and precision of reported data, and pro-
tects the rights, integrity and privacy of subjects par -ticipating in a trial [28, 31]. Protection of the safety, 
wellbeing and rights of human subjects participating 
in a clinical trial is consistent with the principles of the 
Declaration of Helsinki [40] and with the ethical prin-
ciples formulated by the World Medical Association 
[41]. The requirements for conducting clinical trials in 
the European Union, including GCP and good manu-
facturing practice and their respective inspections, are 
implemented in the Clinical Trial Directive (Directive 
2001/20/EC) and the Good Clinical Practice Directive 
(Directive 2005/28/EC) [31].
The responsibility for GCP lies with all participants in 
the trial, from the site staff to the subjects and the ethical 
and monitoring committees. The roles and responsibili-
ties of GCP participants are shown in Table III.
Conclusion
The planning and execution of clinical research is of vital 
importance for the advancement of medical science. The 
validity of clinical research findings depends on a variety 
of factors, such as study design, sampling techniques and 
statistical analysis. Choosing an appropriate study design Tab. II. Phases of a randomized controlled trial of a drug.
Phases Aim Number of participants
Phase 0To check the 
a. capacity of a new drug to modulate its intended target in humans
b. metabolisation of a druga few volunteers
Phase ITo check 
a. safety and unexpected effects 
b. safe dose
c. absorption and elimination by the body 20-80 healthy volunteers or patients in an 
advanced stage of disease
Phase IITo assess
a. safety and effects in a broader population Hundreds of volunteers 
Phase IIITo
a. assess efﬁcacy 
b. check for collateral effects
c. compare with pre-existing treatments
d. determine whether approval and commercialization are possibleHundreds to thousands of volunteers 
Phase IVTo collect more information on
a. risk
b. benefits
c. potential uses of an existing drug Hundreds of thousands of volunteers 
Tab. III. Clinical trial participants and their role in good clinical practice.
Participants Role
Regulatory authoritiesReview clinical data and conduct inspections for GCP and good manufacturing 
practice
SponsorInstitution/organization responsible for initiation, management and finance of 
clinical trial
Project monitor Monitors the project and is appointed by the sponsor
Investigator Team leader responsible for conducting trial at trial site
Trial site pharmacist In charge of maintaining, storing and dispensing drugs
Patients Human subjects
Ethical review committee for the protection of 
subjectsInstitutional or national regulatory authorities ensuring safety, well-being and 
protection of human subjects 
Committee to monitor large trials Overseas sponsors, drug companies

METHODOLOGY FOR CLINICAL RESEARCHE277
requires detailed knowledge of the types of clinical study, 
the situations where they are applied and the possible 
outcomes, so that a methodology befitting the hypothe-
sis is adopted. Careful implementation of study design 
eliminates the chances of bias, provides quality assurance 
of the data collected and increases the validity of the re-
sults, adding value to the findings. Successful preclinical 
studies, basic research and pilot scale intervention studies 
pave the way for more sophisticated clinical trials. Ran-
domised, double-blind clinical trials with case number 
planning are accepted as the gold standard for evaluating 
the efficacy and safety of drugs and therapeutic regimes 
and in evaluating the superiority or similarity of new 
drugs or surgical procedures to existing ones. As clinical 
trials involve testing on humans, their design and conduct 
require careful planning, diligent execution and enormous 
resources to comply with the rules set by the regulatory 
authorities, necessary to achieve robust results.
Acknowledgements
This research was funded by the Provincia Autono-
ma di Bolzano in the framework of LP 15/2020 (dgp 
3174/2021).
Conflicts of interest statement
Authors declare no conflict of interest.
Author's contributions
MB: study conception, editing and critical revision of 
the manuscript; AKK, DP, GH, RB, Paul S, Peter S, RM, 
BF, NC, SM, LL, DD, GMT, MCE, MD, SM, Daniele 
M, GB, KD, MCM, TB, MS, STC, Donald M, AM, AB, 
KLH, MK, LS, LL, GF: literature search, editing and 
critical revision of the manuscript. All authors have read 
and approved the final manuscript.
References
[1] Pepperell Montague W. The ways of knowing; or, The methods 
of philosophy. London: G. Allen & Unwin Ltd. 1st ed. New 
York: The Macmillan Company 1925.
[2] Goldstein M, Goldstein IF. How we know: an exploration of the 
scientific process. 1st ed. New York: Plenum Press 1979.
[3] Hepburn B, Hanne A. Scientific Method. In: Zalta EN, ed. The 
Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. Available at: https://
plato.stanford.edu/index.html. Accessed on: 30/02/2022.
[4] Popper K. The Logic of Scientific Discovery. 2nd ed. London: 
Routledge 2002.
[5] Hugh G. Gauch Jr. Scientific method in practice, 1st ed.  
Cambridge: Cambridge University Press 2003.
[6] Achinstein P. Science rules: a historical introduction to scientific 
methods. 1st ed. Baltimore: The Johns Hopkins University Press 
2004.
[7] Gower B. Scientific Method. 1st ed. London: Routledge 1996. 
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203046128[8] Carey SS. A beginner’s guide to scientific method. 4th ed. 
Belmont: Wadsworth Cengage Learning 2011.
[9] Garg R. Methodology for research I. Indian J Anaesth 
2016;60:640. https://doi.org/10.4103/0019-5049.190619
[10] Prasad K. Fundamentals of evidence based medicine. 1st ed. 
New Delhi: Springer India 2014. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
81-322-0831-0
[11] Lewsey J. Medical Statistics: a guide to data analysis and 
critical appraisal. Ann R Coll Surg Eng 2006;88:600-3. https://
doi.org/10.1308/003588406X117098
[12] Ozhan Caparlar C, Donmez A. What is scientific research and 
how can it be done? Turk J Anaesthesiol Reanim 2016;44:212-
8. https://doi.org/10.5152/TJAR.2016.34711
[13] Röhrig B, du Prel JB, Wachtlin D, Blettner M. Types of study in 
medical research. Dtsch Arztebl Int 2009;106:262-8. https://doi.
org/10.3238/arztebl.2009.0262
[14] Frérot M, Lefebvre A, Aho S, Callier P, Astruc K, Aho Glélé LS. 
What is epidemiology? Changing definitions of epidemiology 
1978-2017. PLoS One 2018;13:e0208442. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pone.0208442
[15] Schröder W, Nickel S. Research Data Management as an 
Integral part of the research process of empirical disciplines 
using landscape ecology as an example. Data Sci J 2020;19. 
https://doi.org/ 10.5334/dsj-2020-026
[16] Chew BH. Planning and conducting clinical research: the whole 
process. Cureus 2019. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.4112
[17] del Mar C, Hoffmann TC. A guide to performing a peer review 
of randomised controlled trials. BMC Med 2015;13:248. https://
doi.org/10.1186/s12916-015-0471-8
[18] Sessler DI, Imrey PB. Clinical Research Methodology 2. 
Anesth Analg 2015;121:1043-51. https://doi.org/10.1213/
ANE.0000000000000861
[19] Stanley K. Design of randomized controlled trials. 
Circulation 2007;115:1164-9. https://doi.org/10.1161/
CIRCULATIONAHA.105.594945
[20] Levin KA. Study design VII. Randomised controlled trials.
Evid Based Dent 2007;8:22-3. https://doi.org/10.1038/
sj.ebd.6400473
[21] NIS Definitions. Available at: https://www.chcuk.co.uk/
non-interventional-studies/nis-definitions/. Accessed on: 
26/06/2022.
[22] Elfil M, Negida A. Sampling methods in clinical research; an 
educational review. Emerg (Tehran) 2017;5:e52. 
[23] Bray F, Colombet M, Mery L, Piñeros M, Znaor A, Zanetti R, 
Ferlay J. Cancer Incidence in five continents, V olume XI. IARC 
Scientific Publication 2021. Available at: https://publications.
iarc.fr/Book-And-Report-Series/Iarc-Scientific-Publications/
Cancer-Incidence-In-Five-Continents%C2%A0V olume-
XI-2021. Accessed on: 26/06/2022.
[24] Pheby DF, Etherington DJ. Improving the comparability of 
cancer registry treatment data and proposals for a new national 
minimum dataset. J Public Health Med 1994;16:331-40. 
[25] Sedgwick P. Retrospective cohort studies: advantages and 
disadvantages, BMJ 2014;348:g1072-g1072. https://doi.
org/10.1136/bmj.g1072
[26] Gandhi P. Clinical research methodology, Ind J Pharm Edu Res 
2011;45:199-209.
[27] Sedgwick P. What is recall bias? BMJ 2012;344:e3519-e3519. 
https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e3519
[28] Pieterse H, Diamant Z. Good clinical practice in clinical 
interventional studies. Eur Clin Respir J 2014;1:26422. https://
doi.org/10.3402/ecrj.v1.26422
[29] Nair B. Clinical trial designs. Indian Dermatol Online J 
2019;10:193. https://doi.org/10.4103/idoj.IDOJ_475_18
[30] Patino CM, Ferreira JC. Inclusion and exclusion criteria 
in research studies: definitions and why they matter. J 

A.K. KIANI ET AL.E278
Bras Pneumol 2018;44:84. https://doi.org/10.1590/s1806-
37562018000000088
[31] Lim CY , In J. Randomization in clinical studies. Korean J 
Anesthesiol 2019;72:221-32. https://doi.org/10.4097/kja.19049
[32] Suresh G, Suresh K, Thomas S. Design, data analysis and 
sampling techniques for clinical research. Ann Indian Acad 
Neurol 2011;14:287. https://doi.org/10.4103/0972-2327.91951
[33] Smith DH, Neutel JM, Lacourcière Y , Kempthorne-Rawson 
J. Prospective, randomized, open-label, blinded-endpoint 
(PROBE) designed trials yield the same results as double-blind, 
placebo-controlled trials with respect to ABPM measurements. J 
Hypertens 2003;21:1291-8. https://doi.org/10.1097/00004872-
200307000-00016
[34] Mann H, Djulbegovic B. Choosing a control intervention for a 
randomised clinical trial. BMC Med Res Methodol 2003;3:7. 
https://doi.org/10.1186/1471-2288-3-7
[35] Misra S. Randomized double blind placebo control studies, 
the ‘Gold Standard’ in intervention based studies. Indian J Sex 
Transm Dis AIDS 2012;33:131. https://doi.org/10.4103/0253-
7184.102130[36] Sedgwick P. External and internal validity in clinical trials. BMJ 
2012;344:e1004-e1004. https://doi.org/10.1136/bmj.e1004
[37] Arjmand B, Payab M, Goodarzi P. Biomedical Product 
Development: Bench to Bedside. 1st ed. Cham: Springer 
International Publishing 2020. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-
030-35626-2
[38] Honek J. Preclinical research in drug development. Medical 
Writing 2017;26:5-8.
[39] Sarzotti-Kelsoe M, Cox J, Cleland N, Denny T, Hural J, 
Needham L, Ozaki D, Rodriguez-Chavez IR, Stevens G, Stiles T, 
Tarragona-Fiol T,  Simkins A. Evaluation and recommendations 
on good clinical laboratory practice guidelines for phase 
I-III clinical trials. PLoS Med 2009;6:e1000067. https://doi.
org/10.1371/journal.pmed.1000067 
[40] Declaration of Helsinki Medical Research Involving Human 
Subjects, 1964. Available at: https://www.wma.net/wht-
we-do/medical-ethics/declaration-of-helsinki. Accessed on: 
26/06/2022.
[41] Medical ethics Deontology, Codes of Practice, Guidelines, 
Professionalism. Available at: https://www.wma.net/what-we-
do/medical-ethics. Accessed on: 26/06/ 2022.
Correspondence: Maria Chiara Medori, MAGI’S LAB, Rovereto (TN), 38068, Italy. E-mail: chiara.medori@assomagi.org
How to cite this article: Kiani AK, Naureen Z, Pheby D, Henehan G, Brown R, Sieving P , Sykora P , Marks R, Falsini B, Capodicasa N, 
Miertus S, Lorusso L, Dondossola D, Tartaglia GM, Ergoren MC, Dundar M, Michelini S, Malacarne D, Bonetti G, Donato K, Medori MC, 
Beccari T , Samaja M, Connelly ST , Martin D, Morresi A, Bacu A, Herbst KL, Kapustin M, Stuppia L, Lumer L, Farronato G, Bertelli M. 
Methodology for clinical research. J Prev Med Hyg 2022;63(suppl.3):E267-E278. https://doi.org/10.15167/2421-4248/jpmh2022.63.2S3.30
© Copyright by Pacini Editore Srl, Pisa, Italy
This is an open access article distributed in accordance with the CC-BY-NC-ND (Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 International) license. 
The article can be used by giving appropriate credit and mentioning the license, but only for non-commercial purposes and only in the original version. For further infor -
mation: https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/deed.en

