Intelligent clinical trials
Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

About the Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions
The Deloitte Centre for Health Solutions (CfHS) is the research arm of Deloitte’s Life Sciences and Health 
Care practices. We combine creative thinking, robust research and our industry experience to develop 
evidence-based perspectives on some of the biggest and most challenging issues to help our clients to 
transform themselves and, importantly, benefit the patient. At a pivotal and challenging time for the 
industry, we use our research to encourage collaboration across all stakeholders, from pharmaceuticals 
and medical innovation, health care management and reform, to the patient and health care consumer.
Connect
To learn more about the CfHS and our research, please visit  
www.deloitte.co.uk/centreforhealthsolutions
Subscribe
To receive upcoming thought leadership publications, events and blogs from the UK Centre,  
please visit https://www.deloitte.co.uk/aem/centre-for-health-solutions.cfm
To subscribe to our blog, please visit https://blogs.deloitte.co.uk/health/
Life sciences companies continue to respond to a changing global landscape and strive to pursue 
innovative solutions to address today’s challenges. Deloitte understands the complexity of these 
challenges and works with clients worldwide to drive progress and bring discoveries to life.

Contents
Why clinical trials must transform 2
The impact of AI on the clinical trial process 8
Clinical trials of the future 19
Endnotes 26

2Intelligent clinical trials
Why clinical trials 
must transform
The traditional ‘linear and sequential’ clinical trials process remains the accepted 
way to ensure the efficacy and safety of new medicines. However, suboptimal 
patient selection, recruitment and retention together with difficulties managing 
and monitoring patients effectively, are extending the length of trials and con-
tributing to high trial failure rates. Artificial intelligence (AI) can improve clinical 
cycle times while reducing the cost and burden of clinical development. This 
report is the third in our series on the impact of AI on the biopharma value chain.
HEALTH CARE COSTS continue to rise as a 
percentage of every country’s gross domes -
tic product (GDP) causing governments and 
private payers to scrutinise rigorously the economic 
value of new treatments. Increasingly, regulators 
expect clinical trials to demonstrate not only effi -
cacy and safety, but also a meaningful impact on 
the lives of patients. This is particularly the case for 
more precise, high-cost therapies that target 
smaller patient groups. The growing expectations of 
regulators and payers requires biopharma compa -
nies to increase the quality and quantity of evidence 
generated during clinical trials and, in turn, is 
increasing the complexity of clinical trial design 
and development.
Screening patients to identify potentially better 
responders and linking payments to individual 
outcomes are among measures that payers are 
negotiating with sponsors to ensure value for money. 
Demonstrating value also requires a change in the 
traditional methods of conducting clinical trials, 
most notably in the collection of real-world clinical 
and non-clinical data on costs and outcomes.Consequently, the race to collect impactful data to 
expand biopharma’s knowledge of the epidemiology 
of disease and to satisfy regulators and Health Tech-
nology Assessment (HTA) authorities is accelerating. 
The growth in number and complexity of clinical 
trials, particularly in oncology, means there is also 
increasing competition for suitable trial participants 
and sites. These factors are shaping the highly 
competitive landscape of the life sciences industry.
The traditional approach 
to clinical trials
Researchers design clinical trials to answer specific 
research questions relating to the efficacy and 
safety of a new intervention by measuring defined 
endpoints, including diagnostic biomarkers, in 
trial participants.1 Clinical trials can only com-
mence after approval by a regulatory authority 
and an ethics committee review of the pre-clinical 
regulatory submission.2 The basic assumption of 
clinical research is that investigators take data 
from a relatively small but representative selection 

3Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
Research &
discoveryClinical
developmentManufacturing 
& supply chainLaunch & 
commercialPost-market 
surveillance & 
patient support
Optional ﬁrst-in-human 
trials – single
sub-therapeutic dose of 
study drug given to  
small number
of subjects (10-15) to 
test the body’s 
responses. Often ﬁrst-in-person 
trials. Testing within 
small group of people 
(20-80) to evaluate 
safety, determine safe 
dosage and identify 
potential side eﬀects. 
Takes 3-6 months.
Around 70% move to 
next phase.Testing with larger 
group of people 
(100-300) to 
determine eﬃcacy and 
to further evaluate 
safety – usually against 
a placebo.
Takes 1-2 years.
Around 33% move to 
next phase.Testing with much larger 
group of
people (1,000-3,000)
to conﬁrm
eﬃcacy, evaluate 
eﬀectiveness,
monitor side eﬀects, 
compare other 
treatments, and assess 
safety.
Takes 1-4 years.
Around 25-30% move to 
next phase.Post-marketing studies 
delineate risks, beneﬁts 
and optimal use. 
Ongoing throughout 
drug’s active medical 
use (thousands of 
patients).
Takes 1+ years
Around 70-90%
success rate.PHASE II PHASE I EARLY PHASE I PHASE III PHASE IVFIGURE 1
The traditional approach to clinical development is a lengthy process with only
10 per cent success rate
ONLY 10% OF DRUG CANDIDATES ENTERING CLINICAL
TRIALS END UP BECOMING REGULATORY APPROVED DRUGS 
Source: Deloitte analysis.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insights
of subjects and generalise the results to the larger 
patient population. If the sample is too constrained 
or poorly selected, it hinders the broad applica-
bility of the results. This is not only a statistical 
concern, but also an ethical and medical one.3
Today it takes 10-12 years on average to bring a 
new drug to market, with limited change over the 
past decades in the linear and sequential process 
used to assess the effi   cacy and safety of drugs. Currently, drug discovery, which is the initial 
phase of R&D takes fi  ve to six years, followed by 
around fi  ve to seven years for clinical trials.4 Of the 
10,000 candidate drugs originally screened, only 
ten make it to clinical trials. On average, of the ten 
drug candidates that enter clinical trials, only one 
is approved for use with patients (see fi  gure 1).5
The 2018 State of industry-sponsored clinical 
development report by Trialtrove (2019) found 

4
that, on average, 25 per cent of completed trials 
across all therapy areas achieved their primary 
endpoint in 2018, compared to 31 per cent in 2017. 
This potentially reflects the growing complexity 
of the R&D landscape in terms of the number 
of compounds and diseases being targeted. Ac-
cording to the US Food and Drug Administration 
(FDA), approximately 33 per cent of drugs move 
from Phase II to III, while around 25 to 30 per 
cent move from Phase III to the next phase.6
Transforming clinical trials is 
critical to improve productivity
The tried and tested process of discrete and fixed 
phases of randomised controlled trials (RCTs) was 
designed principally for testing mass-market drugs. 
However, RCTs lack the analytical power, flexibility 
and speed required to develop the complex new 
therapies that target smaller and often heteroge-
neous patient populations. Furthermore, a Deloitte 
survey of biopharma industry leaders in 2018, 
conducted for the Digital R&D: Transforming the 
future of clinical development report, found general 
agreement that the current high-risk, high-cost 
R&D model is unsustainable. Furthermore, that 
clinical development is struggling to keep pace 
with the ever-growing amount of genomic infor-
mation, real-world evidence (RWE) and other 
emerging data sources (such as biosensors).7
For the past decade, our annual Measuring the 
return from pharmaceutical innovation report 
series has demonstrated that a new model of R&D 
is now needed. This research tracks the internal 
rate of return on investment (IRR) that a cohort of 
12 leading global biopharma companies (and for 
the past five years four smaller, more specialised 
companies) might expect to achieve from their 
late-stage pipelines. It shows that the IRR has 
declined significantly. Specifically, our 2019 report 
found that the average cost of bringing a drug to 
market increased from $1.188 billion in 2010 to $1.981 billion in 2019; the average forecast peak 
sales per asset declined from $816 million in 
2010 to a low of $376 million in 2019. As a result, 
the expected IRR decreased from 10.1 per cent 
in 2010 to 1.8 per cent in 2019. These declining 
returns are the result of internal and external 
productivity challenges across the discovery and 
clinical development phases of drug development 
that call into question big pharma’s R&D model.8
The main challenges for 
clinical development in 2019
The main drivers of R&D performance are the 
increase in clinical development (or cycle) times, 
changes in drug modalities and sources of innova-
tion. Specifically:
• the growing length of the clinical trial cycle is 
arguably the most pressing challenge for 
clinical development
• historically, companies have focused largely on 
small molecules, but over the past decade, there 
has been an increase in the proportion of more 
scientifically complex large biological molecules 
(known as biologics) in companies’ pipelines
• acquisitions and partnerships are an increasing 
source of innovation.9
As most pharma companies have integrated 
biologics into their pipelines, for the purpose of 
this report we refer to all pharma companies as 
biopharma companies.
The first clinical research step is the development of 
a clinical protocol (a document that describes how 
the trial will be conducted and ensures the safety 
of participants and integrity of the data collected). 
The availability of a growing volume and variety 
of data sources (including genomics, imaging, 
digital health and patient-reported outcome data) Intelligent clinical trials

5has led to an expansion in trial protocols in an 
attempt to meet challenging regulatory require-
ments. At the same time, companies have found 
it increasingly diffi   cult to recruit patients that 
meet trial selection criteria. Moreover, the shift 
in drug development eff  orts to new modalities is 
increasing the competition for patients, which is 
adding to recruitment complexity. These factors 
have increased the average length of clinical trials.10
More specifi  cally, as clinical trials progress, more 
patients are required, but the eligibility and suit-
ability requirements also increase. A patient may be 
ineligible to participate due to their medical history 
or a mismatch in the stage of their disease compared 
to the trial protocol. Eligible and suitable patients 
may fi  nd the requirements challenging or the 
recruitment process complex and cumbersome, or 
they may not be aware or incentivised to participate.
The burden of frequent clinic visits also limits 
participation. Recent data suggest that 18 per cent 
of patients drop out after enrolling, with diffi   culty attending clinics cited as a major factor. These 
challenges often create delays to the point that 
86 per cent of all trials do not meet enrolment 
timelines and 30 per cent of Phase III trials fail 
due to enrolment challenges.11 As a result, patient 
recruitment is the largest cost driver of clinical 
trials, accounting for 32 per cent of overall costs 
(see fi  gure 2). Involving patients in developing 
new therapies and trial design, and engaging 
them throughout the development and post-
market process, helps in both recruitment and 
retention, and also provides irrefutable evidence 
of the value of therapies in the real world.
Identifying suitable patients can improve the 
speed and effi   ciency of clinical trials and ultimately 
accelerate the approval of and access to new 
medicines. However, research shows that a rela-
tively small number of eligible patients participate 
in clinical studies. For example, only two to nine 
per cent of adult cancer patients participate in 
clinical trials.12,13 A 2019 meta-analysis of 13 studies 
involving 8,883 patients found that only 8.1 per cent 
of potential patients participated in clinical trials; 
of those that did not, some 55.6 per cent did not 
have a trial available where they were being treated, 
21.5 per cent were deemed ineligible and 14.8 per 
cent chose not to enroll in an available trial.14
There is also a mismatch between the patient 
population that a new therapy is expected to treat 
and participants in the related clinical trial. Despite Source: Deloitte analysis.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insights2%
14%8%32%
25%12%7%FIGURE 2
Cost drivers in clinical trials
Patient recruitment
Clinical trial management system and other technology
Data management and validation
Patient retentionSite retentionOutsourcing costs
Site recruitmentTransforming through AI-enabled engagement
Identifying suitable patients 
can improve the speed and 
eﬃ   ciency of clinical trials 
and ultimately accelerate 
the approval of and access 
to new medicines.

6
numerous initiatives to tackle this, increasing 
clinical trial diversity in an effective, scalable 
and sustainable manner remains a challenge for 
clinical research.15 Furthermore, patients consid -
ering participation in trialling a new medicine 
have to weigh up the benefits of early access to a 
potential new therapy against the risks of adverse 
events, as well as the inconvenience, potential 
financial burden and time requirements.16
The difficulties faced in an increasing proportion 
of clinical trials include ineffective site selection, 
poor study design and trial execution, safety 
issues and dropouts due to practical or financial 
issues.17 Although patient recruitment and reten -
tion extends the time taken to complete a trial, 
four-fifths of trials fail because they are unable 
to demonstrate efficacy or safety.18 Moreover, the 
time and funding required to complete a trial 
increase at each phase. The total cost of a Phase 
III failure includes the cost of all previous phases 
plus the time that could have otherwise been 
used to trial a different drug. Each failed trial 
contributes to the rising costs of biopharma R&D.19
SUCCESS RATES ARE DEPENDENT 
ON DISEASE TYPES
Clinical trial success rates are highly dependent 
on disease type. An extensive study that looked 
at 186,000 unique trials between 2000 and 
2015 found an overall probability of success 
(POS) was 13.8 per cent. However, the POS 
of oncology trials was much lower at 3.4 per 
cent.20 As many biopharma companies are in -
creasingly targeting oncology as their preferred 
therapy area, this low POS is problematic.21
A report from the Tufts Center for the Study of Drug 
Development found that between 1999 and 2018 
the average development timeline for cancer drugs 
was nine per cent longer than for other disease 
areas, but the time the FDA took to approve cancer drugs was 48 per cent shorter.22 This is because new 
oncology products are more likely to receive special 
designations from the FDA to speed up availability 
of medicines that address unmet medical needs. 
However, despite an increasing number of oncology 
drug candidates receiving fast-track designations 
over the past few years, there has not been a dis -
cernible effect on cycle times. This is likely due to 
increasing complexity of protocol design as well as 
increased competition to recruit eligible patients.23
Innovative solutions to 
expedite clinical cycle times
In the past few years a number of solutions 
for innovating clinical trials have emerged 
that rely on a more efficient use of data from 
multiple sources. Examples include:
• Adaptive clinical trials  allow for the contin -
ual modification of trial design based on interim 
data. This can reduce the resources and time 
needed and improve the likelihood of success.24 
A broader use of adaptive trials could eliminate 
many unanticipated risks that undermine effica -
cious drugs and unnecessarily extend 
development timelines. For example, adaptive 
approaches can deliver trial dosing information 
in a single two-year combined Phase II/III, 
which might otherwise require three or more 
consecutive conventional trials over several 
years. In addition to shortening development 
time, such seamless trials may reduce the total 
sample size needed by using the same patients 
in more than one stage. Other advantages 
include changing allocation rates, early termina -
tion and reassessment of the sample size, 
patient subgroups or specific treatments, all of 
which improve efficiency. Research conducted 
by ICON, a global contract research organisa -
tion (CRO), suggests that the use of adaptive Intelligent clinical trials

7
trials across portfolios, as encouraged by regula -
tory agencies in both Europe and the US, could 
reduce trial costs by 25 per cent.25
• Master protocols are used to simultaneously 
evaluate more than one investigational drug 
within the same overall trial structure.26 A 
report from the Deloitte US Center for Health 
Solutions found that by using master protocols, 
biopharma companies can de-risk R&D pro -
grammes, improve the quality of evidence and 
enhance their R&D productivity, all while reduc -
ing costs and study times. For a Phase II 
oncology trial, estimated costs could be reduced 
by 12-15 per cent and study time would be 
reduced 13-18 per cent (15-21 weeks).27
• Synthetic control arms  use RWE as a more 
convenient, safe, time-saving and cost-effective 
way of conducting trials, especially ones with 
small numbers of potential participants. 
Currently, fear of being assigned a placebo is 
one of the top reasons patients choose not to 
participate in clinical trials. A synthetic control 
arm collects data from previous clinical trials, 
electronic health records (EHRs), patient-gener -
ated data from fitness trackers or home medical 
equipment, disease registries and others. These 
data are then used to model or simulate the 
expected results comparing them with those on 
the clinical trial. Eliminating or reducing the 
need for normal control arms ensures that all 
participants receive the active treatment, elimi -
nating concerns about treatment assignment. 
Synthetic control arms can increase efficiency, 
reduce delays, lower trial costs and accelerate 
the access of therapies to market. In addition, 
their use can also eliminate the risk of 
unblinding, which happens when patients dis -
cover which treatment they are being given, 
harming the integrity of the trial.28• Pharmacogenetics testing for patient selec-
tion. Over half of all trials (55 per cent) initiated 
in 2018 included the use of selective pharmacog-
enetic biomarkers for patient selection to predict 
individual responses to drugs in terms of efficacy 
and safety. These trials were four times more 
likely to succeed as compared to clinical trials 
where no biomarkers were used.29
Using AI to improve efficiency 
and effectiveness
The excessive cost, delays and failures of clinical 
trials has a strong impact on patients. Despite 
numerous innovations, two-thirds of classified 
diseases still lack an effective drug therapy.30 
Therefore, finding more effective and efficient ways 
of conducting clinical trials is of critical importance.
Our Intelligent drug discovery: Powered by AI 
report, the second in our series on the impact of 
AI on the biopharma value chain, highlighted the 
growing importance of disparate data sets in R&D. 
It found that, in 2019, AI was more widely adopted 
in drug discovery than in clinical development. 
This is largely because drug discovery involves the 
optimisation and validation of potential new drugs 
through in vivo  cell assays and animal models, 
and does not face the regulatory hurdles required 
in testing potential drug candidates in people.31
However, there is an increasing realisation among 
academic institutions, biopharma companies, 
CROs and smaller biotech firms of the potential of 
AI to transform clinical trials. Specifically, AI has 
the potential to transform many of the key steps 
in clinical trials, from protocol design to study 
execution, thereby improving trial success rates and 
lessening the biopharma R&D burden.32 The rest of 
this report explores the use of AI in clinical trials.Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

8KEY FACTORS undermining the effectiveness of 
clinical trials are patient and site selection 
along with patient recruitment and retention 
processes; as well as the lack of suitable infrastruc -
ture to manage the complexity of running a clinical 
trial. This is especially problematic in the later 
phases, including the need for efficient and reliable 
adherence controls, endpoint detection and patient 
monitoring systems.33
AI, particularly deep learning (DL), machine learning 
(ML) and natural language processing (NLP), 
combined with an effective digital infrastructure, 
has the potential to improve drug approval rates, 
reduce development costs and deliver medications 
to patients faster. All large biopharma companies 
are investing in AI and its applications. Novartis, 
for example, used AI to combine clinical trial 
data from a variety of internal sources to predict 
and monitor trial cost, enrolment and quality. As 
a result, the company reported a 10-15 per cent 
reduction in patient enrolment times in pilot trials.34
A Deloitte survey of 28 biopharma industry 
leaders in 2018 identified several use cases for AI and other digital technologies across the 
clinical trials process (see figure 3).35 These 
use cases have continued to escalate.Biopharma companies have access to growing amounts of scientific and research 
data from a variety of sources, known collectively as real-world data (RWD). While 
applying AI to operational data can drive clinical trial efficiencies, unlocking RWD 
using predictive AI models and analytics tools can accelerate the understanding 
of diseases, identify suitable patients and key investigators to inform site selec-
tion (including virtual trials), and support novel clinical study designs. Adoption 
of AI technologies is therefore becoming a critical business imperative.The impact of AI on the 
clinical trial processIntelligent clinical trials
WHAT IS AI?
AI refers to any computer programme or 
system that does something we would think 
of as intelligent in humans. AI technologies 
extract concepts and relationships from data 
and learn independently from data patterns, 
augmenting what humans can do. These 
technologies include computer vision, deep 
learning, machine learning, natural language 
processing, robotics, speech, supervised 
learning and unsupervised learning.36
Transforming the design and 
conduct of clinical trials
As highlighted in the first part of this report, bio-
pharma companies are adopting various strategies 
for innovating clinical trials. To be effective, these 
rely on increasing amounts of scientific and research 
data arising from a variety of disparate data sources, 

9Source: Deloitte analysis.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insightsAI-enhanced
mobile 
applications, 
wearables, 
biosensors and 
connected 
devicesAdvanced data 
analytics
and AI 
automationAssess feasibility of protocol 
design for patient 
recruitment using RWD.Mine EHRs and publicly 
available content, 
including trial databases 
and social media, to help 
match patients with trials, 
by using NLP and ML.
Expedite recruitment and 
create a more 
representative study 
cohort through 
cloud-based applications.
Simplify and accelerate the 
informed consent process 
using eConsent.Create drafts of investigator 
and site contracts and 
conﬁdentiality agreements 
by smart automation.Analyse digital biomarkers 
on disease progression, 
and other quality-of-life 
indicators.
Enhance adherence 
through smartphone alerts 
and reminders.
eTracking of missed clinic 
visits, and trigger 
non-adherence alerts.Automate sharing of data 
across multiple systems.
eTracking of medication 
using smart pillboxes, and 
tools for visual conﬁrmation 
of treatment compliance.Complete sections of the 
ﬁnal clinical trial report for 
submission by using NLP.
Assess site performance 
(e.g. enrolment and 
dropout rates) with 
real-time monitoring.
Analyse and interpret 
unstructured and 
structured data from 
previous trials and scientiﬁc 
literature.Assess site performance 
(e.g. enrolment and 
dropout rates) with 
real-time monitoring.STUDY CLOSEOUT TRIAL CONDUCT TRIAL STARTUPFIGURE 2
Applications of AI-enabled technology in clinical trials
Data cleaning by ML 
methods.TRIAL DESIGN
such as current and past clinical trials, patient 
support programmes and post-market surveillance. 
Access to additional data can be obtained by collab-
orations with academia, hospitals and technology 
companies. Sources of RWD available include EHRs, 
insurance records, medical imaging, ‘omics’ (e.g. 
genomics, metabolomics and proteomics), wearables 
and health apps, as well as social media. AI applied 
to RWD can extract meaningful patterns of infor-
mation to help improve the design of clinical trials.
AI can optimise the collection and analysis of 
biomarker data at pre-prescribed time points more 
reliably and efficiently than current patient-driven self-monitoring methods. In addition, AI-enabled 
technologies have unparalleled potential to 
organise and analyse the increasing body of data 
collected as part of biopharma R&D. For example, 
the industry can use data from previous trials, 
including failed ones, to improve future designs.
The use of AI can also enable the continuous stream 
of RWD to be cleaned, aggregated, coded, stored and 
managed. This makes data management a quicker, 
seamless and dynamic process. In addition, im-
proved electronic data capture (EDC) can also reduce 
the impact of human error in data collection and 
facilitate seamless integration with other databases. Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

10Patient enrichment, 
recruitment and enrolment
AI-enabled digital transformation can reduce the 
challenges in patient selection through clinical 
trial enrichment strategies (see figure 4). The FDA 
has published guidance on Enrichment strategies 
for clinical trials to support determination of 
effectiveness of human drugs and biological 
products that identifies three strategies to assist 
the biopharma industry in detecting a drug’s 
effectiveness.37 The three strategies, together 
with the specific use of AI, are as follows:
• Reduced population heterogeneity includes 
choosing patients with baseline measurements 
of a disease or a biomarker characterising the 
dis ease in a narrow range, while excluding 
patients whose disease or symptoms improve 
sponta neously or whose measurements are 
highly variable, to increase study power 
Decreasing variability often uses a process 
known as electronic phenotyping, which focuses 
on reducing population heterogeneity. Electronic 
phenotyping requires mining large databases of 
EHRs and accounting for heterogeneity between 
patient records and data types. Applying AI tech-
nologies, especially ML and DL, to electronic 
phenotyping processes can accelerate identifica-
tion of eligible patients for clinical trials.38
• Prognostic enrichment includes choosing 
patients with a greater likelihood of having a dis-
ease-related endpoint or a substantial worsening 
in condition (for continuous measurement end-
points). Prognostic enrichment strategies are 
ripe for AI applications. Neurological diseases 
have been the initial targets, as key biomarkers 
are often expensive or invasive to measure, but non-linear combinations of inexpensive and 
non-invasive models can approximate 
the biomarkers.
• Predictive enrichment includes choosing 
patients who are more likely to respond to the 
drug treatment than other patients with the con-
dition. Such selection can lead to a larger effect 
size (both absolute and relative) and can permit 
use of a smaller study population. Selection of 
patients can be based on a specific patient physi-
ology, a biomarker or a disease characteristic that 
is related to the study drug’s mechanism. Patient 
selection could also be empiric (e.g., the patient 
has previously appeared to respond to a drug in 
the same class).39 Predictive enrichments require 
complex ML models that characterise and assess 
disease progression. Current efforts are focused 
on numerous diseases, particularly mild cognitive 
impairment (MCI) and Alzheimer’s disease, 
where disease-modifying drugs are largely 
unavailable.40
The European Medicines Agency (EMA) also recom-
mends in its Regulatory Science to 2025 strategy to 
work with stakeholders to design collaborative clin-
ical trials, particularly with international partners on 
the Clinical Trial Transformation Initiative (CTTI) 
and similar initiatives to innovate and expedite 
patient identification.41
MINING OF PUBLICLY AVAILABLE DATA
ML and NLP can proactively mine publicly available 
web content, including digital trial announcements, 
trial databases and social media, to help match 
patients with relevant trials. AI-based clinical trial 
matching systems, such as IBM Watson for Clinical 
Trial Matching, are helping to reduce the burden 
of recruitment and enrolment (see case study 1).Intelligent Clinical trials

11FIGURE 3
How AI technologies can help deliver clinical trial enrichment strategies highlighted in 
FDA guidance 
Trial enrichment strategies
REDUCED POPULATION 
HETEROGENEITY
Biomarker veriﬁcation to reduce 
variability and increase study 
power.
PROGNOSTIC ENRICHMENT
Selecting patients more likely
to have measurable clinical 
endpoints.ML and DL methods can be 
applied to mine, analyse and 
interpret multiple data sources, 
including EHRs, medical 
imaging, and ‘omics’ data.
PREDICTIVE ENRICHMENT 
Identifying patients more likely 
to respond to the treatment.
Source: Deloitte analysis.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insights
It is difficult for both patients and clinicians to 
understand and assess eligibility for a specific 
trial, largely due to the complexity of clinical 
terminology used. For example, ClinicalTrials.
gov was designed for researchers, not patients, 
so patients usually rely on other patients with 
similar conditions or doctors to identify a poten-tial trial. However, doctors rarely have time to 
discuss trial options. Several AI technologies can 
offer vital assistance by automatically extracting 
meaningful information from EHRs and other 
unstructured data sources to identify participants 
with matching criteria (see case studies 2 and 3).Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

12CASE STUDY 1. IBM WATSON FOR CLINICAL TRIAL MATCHING USES NLP TO BOOST 
ENROLMENT AND REDUCES TIME TO PROCESS PATIENTS AGAINST PROTOCOLS
IBM Watson Health’s Watson for Clinical Trial Matching (CTM) can collect and link structured and 
unstructured data from EHRs, medical literature, trial information and eligibility criteria from public 
databases like ClinicalTrials.gov. NLP enables Watson for CTM to analyse collected data, which helps 
increase the accuracy and efficiency of the clinical trial matching process by reading and identifying 
trial inclusion and exclusion criteria that limit enrolment, determining viable patient populations at 
trial sites and matching the subsequent data to structured and unstructured data from EHRs.
Early use of Watson for CTM by Mayo Clinic resulted in an 80 per cent increase in enrolment to 
systemic therapy clinical trials for breast cancer in the 11 months after implementation. Further 
training for additional cancer types is under way following on from the current targets of breast, 
gastrointestinal and lung cancers. Mayo and IBM Watson Health also plan to develop the system 
further for other applications, including for radiation, surgery and supportive care.42
In another collaboration during a 16-week pilot, IBM Watson Health, Highlands Oncology Group and 
Novartis used the CTM system to process 90 patients against three breast cancer protocols in 24 
minutes compared to a clinical trial coordinator who took one hour and 50 minutes – a 78 per cent 
decrease.43 
CASE STUDY 2. ANTIDOTE USES ML TO CONNECT PATIENTS TO CLINICAL TRIALS
Surveys show that 75 per cent of patients in the US are interested in participating in research, but 
finding a clinical trial can be challenging. The Antidote platform uses ML to seamlessly connect 
patients with clinical trials, creating a simple process for both drug sponsors and the patients they 
need to reach. The system uses ML to structure and organise trial listings from ClinicalTrials.gov into 
a patient-friendly, searchable format. Patients use the search tool, Antidote Match, to answer a few 
questions about their health, and the system automatically identifies clinical trials for which they may 
qualify. For sponsors with multiple trials in their programs, Antidote offers multi-trial matching as a 
recruitment tool. This approach allows patients to match against several clinical trials from the same 
sponsor, increasing their chances of finding a trial and accelerating research for the sponsor. And if 
none of those trials are right for them, the platform automatically reveals a list of additional, sponsor-
agnostic trials that may be a fit.44 Intelligent clinical trials

13Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
Investigator and site selection
One of the most important aspects of a clinical 
trial is selecting high-functioning investigator 
sites. Site qualities such as administrative require-
ments procedures, resource availability, team 
dynamics and experience ultimately impact both 
study timelines and data quality and integrity. 
Site selection has the potential to dramatically 
affect product approval, study costs and timelines. 
However, it is an often underrated and poorly 
understood discipline. Moreover, investigators and 
sites need to sign a formal agreement to conduct the 
trial in compliance with regulators’ Good Clinical 
Practice and approved protocol requirements. This 
includes complying with auditing, data recording 
and reporting procedures, permit monitoring and 
inspection timetables, and retaining essential docu-
ments in accordance with sponsor requirements.47 
AI technologies can help optimise the way in 
which target locations, qualified investigators, and 
priority candidates are identified accurately, as 
well as help analyse the data that is collected more effectively.48 AI can also help to automate 
workflows by creating drafts of standardised 
contracts such as confidentiality, investigator and 
site agreements to shorten study startup time.
Patient monitoring, medication 
adherence and retention
Algorithms can also help monitor and manage 
patients by automating data capture, digitalising 
standard clinical assessments and sharing data 
across multiple systems.
In addition, nurses and physicians can use AI 
solutions to identify relevant actions according to 
protocol requirements, such as specific clinical tests 
and procedures to monitor diagnostic biomarkers; 
assist in scheduling patient visits; and pre-populate 
patient data into EDC systems. For example, NLP 
can complete sections of the dossier for submission 
to pre-populate standard information into the final 
clinical study report. This saves costs and effort and 
reduces compliance risk and overall time to market.CASE STUDY 3. MENDEL.AI IS IMPROVING IDENTIFICATION OF SUITABLE 
CANCER PATIENTS AND MATCHING TO CLINICAL TRIALS
Mendel.ai, a US-based company founded in 2016, uses AI tools to analyse clinical data, including 
medical history and genetic analysis, from cancer patients. Its goal is to facilitate clinical trials in 
oncology research by organising and analysing RWD, and matching patients to the right clinical trials.45 
They take medical data from many structured and unstructured data sets and turn these into data 
digitised patient journeys aligned to specific treatments. Having collected data on over 1 million journeys, 
its algorithm can segment patient populations by their demographic, such as how African American 
women with breast cancer respond to a particular drug. In essence creating in silico or patient-less 
trials. The AI algorithm built on these data helps trial recruitment by finding eligible patients.
Mendel.ai is compliant with Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act (HIPAA) and General 
Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) requirements and has helped research clinicians to increase the 
number of eligible patients. The company applied its platform retroactively to three oncology studies 
that had recently completed enrolment. This allowed a direct comparison between the results that can 
be achieved through Mendel.ai’s augmentation tools and conventional practices. Mendel.ai showed 
that the use of its service can deliver a 20-50 per cent increase in patient enrolment and drastically 
reduce the time needed to screen through large data sets during patient identification process.46 

14Trials require enough patients to create enough 
statistical power to assess the effectiveness of a 
drug. Once patients are recruited and enrolled, it 
is important to avoid dropout and non-adherence 
as recruiting additional patients leads to trial 
delays and additional costs. Patients who leave 
the trial cannot be replaced one-for-one due to 
the required statistical power of the trial protocol. 
For example, a 20 per cent decrease in patient 
adherence requires a 50 per cent increase in 
sample size to maintain an equivalent statistical 
power.49 However, the average dropout rate across 
clinical trials is 30 per cent, and only 15 per cent of 
clinical trials do not experience patient dropout.50
During most clinical trials, researchers’ under-
standing of patients’ health is limited to site visits. 
Patient compliance to the treatment protocol is, 
therefore, difficult to ascertain accurately. This 
can create a mismatch between the efficacy of 
treatments during clinical trials and the effect of 
the drug in the real world. Clinical trials based on 
advanced AI algorithms, using data collected from 
trial participants via wearables, apps and sensors, 
can provide real-time insights into the safety and 
effectiveness of the treatment. AI can also integrate 
multiple digital biomarkers to understand how the 
patient is responding to the drug and whether there 
is need for dose adjustments. Importantly, these 
connected apps and devices allow patients to stay 
informed and supported in real time, which can enhance engagement and retention. Currently, a 
number of AI-augmented platforms for remote 
patient monitoring, which can be used both in health 
care and in clinical trials, have been approved by the 
FDA.51,52 Other technologies developed to improve 
adherence include smart pillboxes or pill bottles, 
virtual pillboxes and behavioural economics-based 
incentives.53 DL and ML algorithms can analyse 
patient data from wearables and video monitoring 
in real time and predict the risk of dropout for 
an individual patient by detecting the onset of 
behaviour that led to non-adherence previously.
Using operational data 
to drive AI-enabled 
clinical trial analytics
Clinical trials generate immense operational data, 
but functional data silos and numerous applications 
often hinder biopharma executives who need a com-
prehensive view of their clinical trials portfolio over 
multiple global sites to make informed decisions. As 
a result, many hours are lost collecting and analysing 
diverse data sets to optimise trial operations, as 
well as to improve cost and resource efficiencies. 
By consolidating operational data on a clinical 
trial analytics platform with predictive capabilities, 
biopharma companies can improve their ability to 
discern whether a data anomaly is a true risk, which 
helps stage more efficient and productive visits.Intelligent clinical trials

15Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
CASE STUDY 4. MEDIDATA’S ACORN AI
Medidata, a global CRO, established Acorn AI in early 2019 to develop new insights across all phases 
of drug development. Its aim is to make data ‘liquid’ across the end-to-end life cycle of a biopharma 
company: from research all the way to development and into post-market surveillance to build 
linkages between clinical trials, genomics, RWE, translational health and other data sets.54 Its aim is 
to help biopharma make quick ‘go/no go’ decisions, accelerate clinical trials and demonstrate value. 
Acorn AI is built on the Medidata platform, which comprises more than 17,000 clinical trials with 
structured, standardised clinical data repositories from over 4.8 million patients.
Acorn AI is focusing on addressing two big trends. The first is precision medicine with CAR-T 
therapy, tissue engineering, and gene and cell therapy. The second is the advancement of AI 
and new sources of data to give researchers a 360-degree view of the patient, including clinical, 
genomic, molecular, as well as socio-economic, behavioural and environmental data. It aims to help 
sponsors make critical decisions on which drugs to progress from discovery to clinical trials; how 
to accelerate clinical trials to speed the treatment to market; and how to create better-integrated 
evidence, including both clinical and RWE, to demonstrate the value of products to regulators, 
patients, payers and providers.
There are also serious IT infrastructure and data 
interoperability challenges with a lack of standards 
for data sharing across multiple EDC systems and 
sites, for example, providing access to EHRs. Some 
biopharma companies deal with interoperability 
across their studies by dictating data management 
rules, specifying which data platforms to use and 
how the data should be delivered.55 An important 
solution to this is the adoption of open data 
standards, which can improve interoperability 
and allow seamless integration. An open platform 
solution allows easy integration of sensors, user 
applications and wearables data via standard 
application programming interfaces (APIs).56
Consolidating all data – whatever the source 
– on a company’s shared analytics platform 
can foster collaboration and integration, and 
provide insights across vital metrics ranging 
from enrolment rate and screening failure rates, 
to protocol deviations. An effective integrated 
platform incorporates advanced analytics, 
including predictive analytics, at every stage of the 
process to uncover actionable insights that were 
previously difficult or even impossible to attain. 
Incorporating a self-learning system, designed to improve predictions and prescriptions over 
time, as well as data visualisation tools, can 
proactively deliver reliable analytic insights to 
users.57 One CRO has established an AI-driven 
platform to develop new insights across all 
phases of drug development (see case study 4).
Game changers supporting 
the use of AI for clinical trials
OUTSOURCING AND STRATEGIC 
RELATIONSHIPS TO OBTAIN 
NECESSARY AI SKILLS AND TALENT
Biopharma companies are looking to strategic and 
operational relationships based on outsourcing 
models. A number of companies increasingly see 
CROs that have invested in data science skills 
and talent as strategic partners as they provide 
access not only to specialised expertise, but also 
to a wide range of potential trial participants.58
In 2016, Deloitte research identified that, by 
outsourcing clinical trials to external partners with 
expectations set around outcomes, biopharma 
companies can leverage their knowledge and 

16expertise gained from repeatedly providing the 
service.59 Further research in 2018 suggested 
more companies will use outsourcing to obtain the 
necessary expertise, especially in advanced tech-
nologies, such as AI, cloud computing and robotics. 
Sector growth will be driven by strategic partner-
ships with academia, analytics companies and big 
tech, as well as CROs, as biopharma companies 
focus on strengthening their R&D capabilities.60
CROs provide a range of expertise to bring un-
derstanding and solutions to the highly technical 
challenges of transforming clinical trials. In 
2015, Research and Markets estimated that by 
2020 over 70 per cent of all clinical trials will be 
outsourced to CROs.61 As AI generates increasing 
momentum and interest across the biopharma 
industry, CROs will be in great demand due 
to their ability to combine AI knowledge with 
expertise in specific therapeutic areas, including 
indications and regulatory requirements, and 
by offering pharmacovigilance specialists.62
The 2018 report from Research and Markets 
predicts the global CRO market will grow with 
a compound annual growth rate (CAGR) of 7.62 
per cent, from $36.27 billion in 2017 to $56.34 
billion in 2023.63 This is due to the expected 
increase in outsourcing of R&D activities, in 
R&D expenditures and the number of clinical 
trials. Globally more than 1,100 CRO companies 
were active in 2017, with the top ten generating 
a collective total revenue of $34.514 billion.64
As we mentioned in our Intelligent drug dis-
covery: Powered by AI report, the vast majority 
of AI startups working on biopharma R&D are 
currently focused on the drug discovery stage of 
the process.65 However, an increasing number 
of startups (around 30) are now working in the 
clinical trials space, including partnering or 
contracting with biopharma.66 Examples include:• Trials.ai: Uses AI to analyse large sets of 
genomic data, journal articles, past clinical 
studies and other forms of research to improve 
study design. Using its proprietary codified clin-
ical trials database, the system is able to unlock 
information, derive insights and make recom-
mendations to trial sponsors on how to best 
design and optimise their trial protocols, as 
well-designed protocol limits improves recruit-
ment and retention and reduces burden on 
patients and trial sites by bringing in cost and 
time efficiency.67 For one of its clients, Trials.ai 
shortened study timelines by 33 per cent and 
reduced data errors by 20 per cent.68
• Concerto HealthAI: Uses its RWD capabili-
ties and eurekaHealth AI platform to design 
robust clinical trials and generate precision 
treatment insights. In March 2019, Concert 
HealthAI announced a strategic agreement with 
Bristol-Myers Squibb (BMS), and in April 2019, 
announced a partnership with Pfizer.69
• GNS Healthcare: Uses its Reverse Engineering 
& Forward Simulation (REFS) causal AI and sim-
ulation platform to analyse RWD and clinical trial 
data to model patient responses to treatments in 
silico and has worked with biopharma companies, 
including Amgen, BMS, Celgene, Johnson & 
Johnson and Novartis.70
TECH GIANTS DISRUPTING 
THE STATUS QUO
The size and growth of the health care market 
and the potential for technology to impact the life 
sciences industry in the same way as other custom-
er-facing industries, such as banking, retail and 
travel, has attracted the attention of the tech giants. 
This is disrupting the status quo and threatening 
biopharma’s legacy culture. In 2019, initiatives 
converging advanced data science, medical knowl-
edge and technology included the following: Intelligent clinical trials

17Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
CASE STUDY 5. HOW BIOPHARMA COMPANIES ARE WORKING WITH APPLE’S 
RESEARCHKIT TO MONITOR PATIENTS IN CLINICAL TRIALS
In 2016, GSK launched the PARADE (Patient Rheumatoid Arthritis Data from the Real World) study 
for which it developed an app using Apple’s ResearchKit framework. This app was downloaded over 
200 times within 48 hours of launch. Having patients using this app allowed research clinicians to 
obtain more realistic symptomatic reports, including morning stiffness, one of the key symptoms of 
rheumatoid arthritis, which might have dissipated by the time patients reached the clinic.76
More recently, in 2018, Novartis announced the launching of FocalView, an app developed through 
Apple’s ResearchKit to be used as an ophthalmic digital research platform. FocalView aims to make 
ophthalmology clinical trials more accessible and flexible by allowing clinical researchers to monitor 
disease progression by collecting self-reported data in real time directly from consenting patients. 
This app was launched in the App Store in the US to be tested in a prospective, non-interventional 
study to assess its ease of use and ability to collect important clinical data and other documentation, 
including informed consent. In the future, Novartis aims to validate the app by comparing it with 
traditional visual testing methods in clinical settings.77• Verily Life Sciences, a subsidiary of Google’s 
Alphabet Inc., teamed up with Novartis, Otsuka, 
Pfizer and Sanofi on a project to improve patient 
recruitment and retention and speed up clinical 
trials. This project, collectively known as Project 
Baseline, is using Verily’s AI-powered research 
tools, including wearable devices and sensors as 
well as analytical tools that can bring together 
EHRs, biometrics and patient-reported data. It 
plans to launch studies across multiple thera -
peutic areas, including cardiovascular disease, 
dermatology, diabetes, mental health and 
oncology.71
• Apple announced the launch of three clinical 
studies in partnership with leading academic 
and research institutions that will use its new 
ResearchKit app. These are: Apple Women’s 
Health Study, in partnership with Harvard T.H. 
Chan School of Public Health and National 
Institute of Environmental Health Sciences; 
Apple Heart and Movement Study, in partner -
ship with Brigham and Women’s Hospital and 
American Heart Association; and Apple Hearing Study, in partnership with University of 
Michigan. Apple previously completed the Apple 
Heart Study using Apple Watch and its 
ResearchKit app.72 In addition, large biopharma 
companies have launched apps that were devel -
oped through ResearchKit platform to improve 
RWD collection and patient monitoring in clini -
cal studies (see case study 5).
• Amazon launched Comprehend Medical, an AWS 
Cloud NLP service that decodes and mines struc-
tured and unstructured data to extract information 
such as medical condition and medication regi-
men from clinical trial reports, doctors’ notes and 
EHRs.73 AWS Cloud AI-enabled services and 
tools are HIPAA and GDPR compliant and can be 
used to streamline clinical trials by facilitating, 
among others, global data management and 
patient recruitment and monitoring.74 Roche 
Diagnostics is using Comprehend Medical to 
enable its NAVIFY Clinical Trial Match platform 
to extract and structure information from medical 
documents to match patients to available indepen-
dent clinical trials.75

18• Microsoft has entered a five-year collaboration 
with Novartis to explore how to combine 
Microsoft’s advanced AI technology with 
Novartis’ deep life sciences expertise. The aim is 
to find new ways to address challenges, such as 
drug discovery, clinical trials, manufacturing, 
operations and finance. As part of Microsoft’s 
work with Novartis, data scientists from 
Microsoft Research and research teams from 
Novartis will work together to investigate how 
AI can help unlock transformational new 
approaches in three specific areas: personalised 
treatment for macular degeneration; use of AI to 
make manufacturing new gene and cell thera -
pies more efficient; and use of AI to shorten the 
time required to design and develop new 
medicines.78Pharma sponsors are partnering with large tech 
companies to leverage their core expertise in digital 
science. They are also looking to the burgeoning 
ecosystem of smaller tech companies to develop 
potentially disruptive data innovation and new 
methods of obtaining and tracking relevant clinical 
and socioeconomic data to improve patient inter -
faces. For life sciences, tech giants can be:
• potential partners
• competitors
• and both an opportunity and a threat as they 
disrupt specific areas of the industry.79
Today, we are seeing a growing number of ex -
amples of how the end-to-end utilisation of AI 
is also impacting how biopharma companies 
interact with patients (see case study 6).
CASE STUDY 6. TAKEDA IS USING AN AI-ENABLED PLATFORM 
TO CREATE PATIENT-CENTRED TREATMENTS
In 2016, Takeda Pharmaceuticals established the R&D Data Science Institute, including a R&D data 
hub that integrates data sets such as clinical trials, observational studies, population-level biobanks 
and RWD, aimed at generating insights using advanced ML techniques.
Takeda chose two complex therapeutic areas, non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (NASH) and treatment-
resistant depression (TRD), to evaluate the capabilities of its ML algorithms and platform. The aim 
is to improve the treatment journey for patients as well as helping to guide decisions on the cost-
effectiveness of treatments, drug development investments and planning protocols for clinical trials.
To create better testing models and prove its hypotheses, Takeda used Deloitte’s ConvergeHEALTH 
Deep Miner™ platform to analyse massive amounts of RWD. The platform is designed to accelerate 
predictive modelling by utilising ML and neural network algorithms with real-world health care data. 
The AWS Cloud-enabled Deep MinerTM platform used DL and ML techniques to improve the predictive 
accuracy of Takeda’s earlier results from 53.4 per cent to 92 per cent.80 Intelligent clinical trials

19Clinical development and 
the future of health
The life sciences and health care industries are 
on the brink of large-scale disruption driven by 
interoperable data, open and secure platforms 
and consumer-driven care. The next 20 years 
will see a fundamental shift from ‘health care’ 
to ‘health’. While diseases will never be fully 
eradicated, our understanding of data and 
science, as well as the use of AI and other digital 
technologies, will enable the identification of 
pathological conditions earlier. This will facilitate 
more proactive interventions and provide a better 
understanding of disease progression to sustain 
patient well-being more actively and effectively.
Advanced early intervention and enhanced adher -
ence will help ensure the effectiveness of these new 
therapies.81 AI-enabled digital transformation is becoming a strategic imperative, and biopharma 
companies need to decide what role they will 
play in the transformed health ecosystem.82
As discussed in our report Intelligent drug dis -
covery , AI will accelerate the identification of new, 
more precise and targeted therapeutics. These 
new drugs will be designed to be highly specific, 
linked to genetics and to avoid side effects. Clinical 
trials will need to accommodate the increased 
number of more targeted approaches required.
In the future, AI, together with enhanced com -
puter simulations and advances in personalised 
medicine, will lead to in silico  trials, which use 
advanced computer modelling and simulations 
in the development or regulatory evaluation of a 
drug. While in silico  trials will potentially reduce, 
refine and partially replace in vivo  experimentation, 
completely simulated clinical trials are not feasible 
with current technology and understanding of 
biology. Nevertheless, their development will 
have major benefits over current in vivo  clinical 
trials. Indeed, the FDA is already planning for a 
future in which more than half of all clinical trial 
data will come from computer simulations.83 Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
Biopharma has traditionally been slow to adopt innovative technologies in the 
recruitment and management of clinical trials. However, the convergence of 
medical knowledge, exponential increases in the amounts of RWE and advances 
in technology and data management present a transformational opportunity. 
Harnessing data by applying AI technologies has the potential to enhance clini-
cal trial productivity, improve the patient experience and accelerate regulatory 
decision-making.Clinical trials of the future
Biopharma companies are 
set to develop tailored 
therapies that cure disease 
rather than treat symptoms.

20In silico trials can eliminate the need for Phase I,  
in which the safety of compounds in healthy  
subjects is tested.
At the beginning of 2020, in silico medicine is 
still in its infancy, but there are many promising 
examples that show the potential to replace 
traditional clinical trials within a few years.84,85 
In the meantime, improving the efficacy of the 
entire process is more likely to depend on AI 
and other technologies to improve efficiency and 
POS.86 Indeed, AI-enabled applications are likely 
to become standard in the biopharma operating 
model over the next five to ten years (see figure 5).
Deloitte’s Digital R&D: Transforming the future of 
clinical development report highlighted the steps 
needed for biopharma to succeed in clinical trials:• engage  effectively with patients and 
stakeholders through targeted, omnichannel 
interactions to meet their needs and foster 
trusted relationships
• innovate patient care by catalysing the devel-
opment of products and services that deliver 
measurable value for health care providers, 
payers and patients
• execute efficiently by digitalising and rationalis-
ing processes to drive efficiencies, reduce cycle 
times and deliver cost savings.87
In the future, AI will ensure that all these 
steps are done more cost-effectively and effi-
ciently. The quicker the clinical development 
process the more lives that can be saved.
FIGURE 5
Expected timeline for the adoption of AI-enhanced digital technologies at scale
READY FOR NEAR-TERM ADOPTION
• eConsent
• Patient-reported endpoints using mobile
 applications and wearables
• Risk-based site monitoring
• Assessment of protocol design feasibility
 using data from multiple sourcesNEXT IN LINE
• Automated data capturing, integration
 and sharing
• Mine EHRs and patient records to assess
 feasibility and expedite recruitment
• Workﬂow automation of repetitive
 activities
• Partially virtual trials
• Digital biomarkers as secondary 
 endpointsMORE ADVANCED TECHNOLOGIES
• Synthetic control arms and trials
• AI tools to analyse and interpret
 unstructured data
• ML to clean data
• Completely virtual trials
• Digital biomarkers as primary endpoints
• NLP to perform more complex medical
 writing activitiesin silico
Source: Deloitte US Center.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insights3
YEARS5
YEARS10
YEARSNOWSTILL BEING EXPLORED
• Blockchain • Virtual/augmented reality • Digital assistants and voice recognitionIntelligent clinical trials

21The future of clinical 
trial regulation
Regulators around the globe have released guidance 
to encourage biopharma companies to use RWE 
strategies. In the US, the FDA is leading the way 
with guidance on Submitting documents using 
real-world data and real-world evidence to FDA 
for drugs and biologics guidance for industry88 and 
on Use of real-world evidence to support regu-
latory decision-making for medical devices.89 In 
addition, the 21st Century Cures Act, passed in 2016, 
was designed to help bring new innovations and 
advances to patients more efficiently and faster.90
Accordingly, the FDA is working with the 
clinical trial community and patient groups 
to develop scientific and technical standards 
for incorporating new digital technologies into 
clinical trials to make them more agile and 
accessible to patients and regulators. For 
example, remote and risk-based monitoring 
can lower development costs, improve patient 
care and provide better regulatory oversight.91
The FDA also sees immense potential in using 
digital technologies to bring clinical trials to the 
patient. It believes that more accessible clinical 
trials can foster participation by a more diverse 
patient population and communities where patient 
care is delivered. This will generate information 
that is more representative and help providers 
and patients make better informed treatment 
decisions. These decentralised clinical trials can 
help move data collection outside the boundaries 
of traditional clinical research facilities.92
As the variety, velocity and volume of RWD 
submitted to the FDA increases, the FDA will 
also increase its use of DL and NLP tools in 
its regulatory processes. For biopharma, early 
engagement with regulatory authorities to align 
on objectives, study design and use of digital 
biomarkers or surrogate endpoints will be of critical importance. In recognition that AI skills 
are highly sought after and that there are diffi-
culties recruiting and retaining the necessary 
talent, the FDA is taking several steps, including:
• developing an FDA curriculum on AI in partner-
ship with external academic partners. The aim is 
to improve the ability of FDA reviewers and 
managers to evaluate products that incorporate 
advanced algorithms and facilitate the FDA’s 
capacity to develop novel regulatory 
science tools.
• piloting a competitive fellowship programme 
that enables postdoctoral students from leading 
academic centres to join the FDA for two-year 
fellowships to develop high-impact AI-based reg-
ulatory science tools.
• the FDA’s Oncology Center of Excellence (OCE) 
is exploring the use of real-world endpoints, like 
time-to-treatment discontinuation, for prag-
matic randomised clinical trials for FDA 
approved therapies in the post-market setting.93
In addition, regulatory agencies will remain 
focused on leveraging technology and transla-
tional data to improve the overall efficiencies 
and cost control of conducting trials, to speed 
delivery of benefit to patients and to support 
shorter development timelines and approvals.
PATIENT CENTRICITY AND AN IMPROVED 
CLINICAL TRIAL EXPERIENCE
In the future, all stakeholders involved in the 
clinical trial process will have aligned their decisions 
with the patient’s wants, needs and preferences. 
Sponsors channel information about the trial, the 
process, the people involved, through the patient. 
Sponsors not only incorporate patient perspectives 
throughout study design, but also deploy open 
communication channels during study execution. 
This has improved success in attracting, engaging, 
and retaining committed patients throughout study Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

22duration and after study termination. Initiatives 
include the use of digital therapeutics (clinically 
validated interventions, either stand-alone or 
in combination with medical products); and 
using AI-enabled digital health technologies and 
patient support platforms during the whole trial 
process, for example: leveraging compliance 
apps, clinical endpoint and data capture tools, 
and remote trial delivery systems (see figure 4).
What next for biopharma?
For the next few years, RCTs are likely to remain the 
gold standard for validating the efficacy and safety 
of new compounds in large populations. However, 
for initial registration, innovative trials using RWD 
are likely to play a more relevant role in defining 
new, patient-centred endpoints and in expanding 
and refining indications. One of the most prominent 
activities that will change clinical trials the most 
over the next ten years will be moving patient 
medical information into electronic format and 
enabling the utilisation of RWD in powerful ways.
The next decade will also see an increase in the im-
plementation of virtual clinical trials. These leverage 
the capabilities of innovative digital technologies, 
including apps, eConsent platforms and telemedi-
cine, to lessen the financial and time burdens that 
patients incur. Virtual trials enable faster enrolment 
of more representative groups in real time and in 
their normal environment (as opposed to strictly 
controlled clinical environments) and monitor these 
patients remotely. Deloitte research suggests as 
many as half of all trials could be done virtually. The 
convenience of virtual trials should improve patient 
retention and accelerate clinical development 
timelines, addressing one the biggest challenges in biopharma R&D.94 Indeed, the move to virtual 
clinical trials means that any qualifying patient who 
wants to participate in clinical research and who 
meets the selection criteria will be able to do so.
The use of virtual trials is only just beginning. For 
example, in December 2019, Europe’s Innovative 
Medicines Initiative launched a new project, Trials@
Home. This evaluates how remote decentralised 
clinical trials (RDCTs), which use AI-enabled tech-
nologies to allow bigger, more diverse and remote 
populations to take part in clinical trials, could 
become the gold standard for clinical research.95 
The expectation is that within the next five to ten 
years this should entirely transform clinical trials.
In the future, biopharma companies will capitalise 
on the digitalisation of health care to manage 
clinical trials remotely. One such example is 
the creation of a hub-and-spoke command 
centre. Novartis is already tackling its R&D costs 
by creating a single ‘control tower’ to digitally 
monitor and troubleshoot clinical trials taking 
place across the globe in real time, known as 
Nerve Live. This platform uses ML with predictive 
algorithms allowing Novartis to identify future 
potential logjams in its clinical trials 12, 18 or even 
24 months down the road, enabling the company 
to take action to prevent the delay occurring.96 
In the future, biopharma 
companies will capitalise on 
the digitalisation of health 
care to manage clinical 
trials remotely.Intelligent clinical trials

23Positive diagnosis 
and available 
treatments not 
eﬀectiveFIGURE 4
Patient's journey through an AI-enabled digital trial
Connected AI-enhanced digital technologies will transform clinical trials by making them safer,
more eﬃcient and eﬀective, and, above all, truly patient-centric
Doctor uses AI-enabled search tool
to ﬁnd a clinical trial, using the
patient’s clinical data (EHRs, etc)By quickly mining numerous data sets,
AI algorithms ﬁnd a match with a 
recruiting Phase II study and the
patient can proceed to enrolThe patient receives mobile support with 
detailed information about the study 
and can ask any additional questions, 
before providing regulatory-compliant 
eConsent
Patient is informed on the progress of the trial in real time as AI-enabled algorithms continuously analyse 
data to ensure their safety. If necessary, these digital technologies will allow the patient to join later 
phases of the trial so they can have continued access to the treatment.If site visits are required, the patient
can have arranged transportations 
through AI-enabled platforms, and
smart appointments can be created
by using local information and the 
patients’ own calendarVirtual monitoring and telemedicine can 
reduce site visits; patient is supported 
from the comfort of their own homeMobile devices and wearables
provide constant monitoring and 
support by sending reminders to ensure 
adherence to protocol and to inform 
about the progress of the trial
Source: Deloitte analysis.
Deloitte Insights | deloitte.com/insightsTransforming through AI-enabled engagement

24Given the fragmented and highly regulated 
nature of the industry, biopharma companies 
will need to establish effective AI strategies for 
clinical development, including the following:
• partnerships with AI companies: The scar-
city of skills and talent needed to develop AI 
algorithms and to understand the complexity of 
biological systems means biopharma strategies 
should include partnerships with leading AI for 
drug discovery and development companies. 
Biopharma companies benefit from having AI 
solutions that are specific to their own propri-
etary data, and the AI firm has the opportunity to 
develop its skills by accessing vast amounts of 
longitudinal data sets.
• data sharing: Fierce competition between bio-
pharma companies means traditionally there has 
been limited information sharing, exacerbated by 
challenging regulatory and compliance require-
ments. While data-sharing partnerships between 
biopharma companies can optimise the use of AI, 
this will only be effective if there is a change to a 
more collaborative mindset both within and 
between companies.
• algorithm transparency: Regulators expect 
transparency regarding the algorithms used for 
drug development to understand AI-based con-
clusions. The risks of regulators seeing AI as a 
‘black box’ could lead to problems obtaining 
approval particularly when the submissions use 
biomarkers developed using AI. Our A bold 
future for life sciences regulation: Predictions 
2025 report highlights the importance of bio-
pharma companies working proactively with 
regulators to agree to acceptable regulatory path-
ways to improve the effectiveness of the 
regulatory process.97
• data privacy: The relative ease of working with 
non-patient data during drug discovery means AI 
is currently more widely adopted in drug discovery than in clinical development.98 The use 
of patient data is highly sensitive and, as AI capa-
bilities develop, companies need to understand 
the appropriate legal and compliance require-
ments needed to protect the increasing volume of 
data. GDPR compliance in Europe and similar 
requirements being developed in the US and else-
where will be important, especially as failure to 
comply could have significant financial and repu-
tational consequences. Moreover, biopharma 
companies will need to ensure that any patient 
data used has specific consent for the specified 
purpose and that it remains private and secure.99
While AI is yet to be widely adopted and applied 
to clinical trials in a meaningful way, it is clear 
that AI has the potential to transform clinical 
development. The applications of AI as outlined 
in this report could lead to faster, safer and 
significantly less expensive clinical trials.
The industry is at a tipping point where the adop-
tion of AI technologies can enable less costly and 
more productive drug development. The potential 
of AI to improve the patient experience will also 
help deliver the ambition of biopharma to embed 
patient-centricity more fully across the whole R&D 
process. Ultimately, transforming clinical trials 
will require companies to work entirely differently, 
drawing on change management skills, as well as 
partnerships and collaborations. As highlighted 
in our Intelligent drug discovery report, the 
success for biopharma companies using AI for 
clinical trials will depend on having highly skilled 
interdisciplinary leadership and skilled interdis-
ciplinary AI experts who can innovate, organise 
and guide others, as well as AI-friendly CEOs and 
board members to drive the adoption of AI.
If biopharma succeeds in capitalising on AI’s 
potential, the internal and external productivity 
challenges that have driven the decline in the rate 
of return on investment in biopharma innovation 
will be reversed and the industry will thrive.Intelligent clinical trials

25
Five key questions for 
biopharma’s adoption 
of AI in clinical trials
As highlighted throughout the report, we consider 
that the use of AI tools in clinical development 
is now a critical business imperative. AI technol-ogies are creating an opportunity for improving 
the clinical trials process by reducing clinical 
cycle times and costs and improving patient 
experience. However, before adopting AI solu-
tions, there are a number of key questions that 
biopharma companies need to consider carefully.Transforming through AI-enabled engagement
WHAT ARE YOUR MAIN INTERNAL COST DRIVERS OF YOUR CLINICAL TRIAL 
PROCESS, AND HOW MIGHT AVAILABLE AI SOLUTIONS HAVE THE MOST IMPACT?
Patient recruitment and data management are among the largest cost drivers of clinical 
trials and are currently where AI shows the most promise.
DO YOU HAVE THE NECESSARY SKILLS AND TALENT TO INTEGRATE 
AI TECHNOLOGIES INTO YOUR CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT?
The adoption of AI innovation requires an internal team of experts, comprising 
biologists, chemists, engineers, data scientists and bioinformaticians, working in cross-
functional teams. The aim should be to promote an ‘intrapreneurship culture’, providing 
these teams with the freedom and resources to create innovative solutions.
CAN EXTERNAL PARTNERSHIPS PROVIDE A SOLUTION TO THE EXPERTISE 
NEEDED FOR AI ADOPTION IN YOUR CLINICAL TRIALS?
Biopharma companies can benefit from selecting reliable partners to leverage their 
extensive knowledge and expertise gained from repeated experience. 
WHAT IS YOUR STRATEGY FOR RESPONDING TO THE DISRUPTION THAT 
TECH GIANTS ARE BRINGING TO CLINICAL DEVELOPMENT? 
Tech giants are the leading experts in the use of big data and in developing new AI 
solutions. They are increasingly disrupting the health care industry and investing in the 
development of AI tools for drug discovery and development. For biopharma companies, 
tech giants can be an opportunity as potential partners; a threat as competitors; or both 
an opportunity and a threat, for which they need to have a clear strategy for how to 
respond to this changing landscape.
HOW ITERATIVE IS YOUR APPROACH TO THE REGULATION OF AI-ENABLED 
PROCESSES, AND IS YOUR REGULATORY FUNCTION SEEN AS A STRATEGIC ASSET? 
Regulators accept the potential of leveraging RWD to make clinical trials more accessible 
and participatory. However, data-driven approaches will only enable faster regulatory 
approvals, improved patient experience and early access to treatments, if there is early 
engagement and increased transparency of operations. Regulatory relationships need 
to be based on a win-win approach.

26
1. Learn About Clinical Studies, NIH U.S. National Library of Medicine, 2019. See also: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/
about-studies/learn#ClinicalTrials, accessed December 17, 2019.
2. Intelligent drug discovery: Powered by AI, Francesca Properzi et al., 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/
us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/artificial-intelligence-biopharma-intelligent-drug-discovery.html, accessed 
December 17, 2019.
3. Why improving inclusion and diversity in clinical trials should be a research priority, Karen Taylor, 2019. See also: 
https://blogs.deloitte.co.uk/health/2019/08/why-improving-inclusion-and-diversity-in-clinical-trials-should-be-a-
research-priority.html, accessed December 17, 2019.
4. Step 3: Clinical Research, U.S. Food and Drug Administrator (FDA), 2018. See also: https://www.fda.gov/patients/
drug-development-process/step-3-clinical-research, accessed December 17, 2019.
5. Artificial Intelligence for Clinical Trial Design, Stefan Harrer et al., 2019. See also: https://www.cell.com/trends/
pharmacological-sciences/fulltext/S0165-6147(19)30130-0, accessed December 17, 2019.
6. Step 3: Clinical Research, US Food & Drug Administration, 2018. See also: https://www.fda.gov/patients/drug-
development-process/step-3-clinical-research, accessed January 27, 2020.
7. Digital R&D: Transforming the future of clinical development, Dawn Anderson et al., 2018. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-research-and-development-clinical-strategy.
html?id=us:2el:3pr:4di3967:5awa:6di:MMDDYY, accessed December 17, 2019.
8. Ten years on: Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation 2019, Mark Steedman et al., 2019. See 
also: https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/measuring-return-from-
pharmaceutical-innovation.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
9. Ibid.
10. Ibid.
11. Recruitment Infographic, CLINPAL. See also: https://www.clinpal.com/blog/recruitment-infographic/,  
accessed December 18, 2019.
12. Patient Income Level and Cancer Clinical Trial Participation, Joseph M. Unger et al., Journal of Clinical Oncology, 
2013. See also: https://ascopubs.org/doi/full/10.1200/JCO.2012.45.4553, accessed December 18, 2019.
13. A population-level investigation of cancer clinical trials participation in a UK region, Conan 
Donnelly et al., European Journal of Cancer Prevention, 2017. See also: https://insights.ovid.com/
crossref?an=00008469-201709001-00017, accessed December 18, 2019.
14. Systematic Review and Meta-Analysis of the Magnitude of Structural, Clinical, and Physician and Patient Barriers 
to Cancer Clinical Trial Participation, Joseph M Unger et al., Journal of the National Cancer Institute (JNCI), 2019. 
See also: https://academic.oup.com/jnci/article/111/3/245/5307078, accessed December 18, 2019.
15. Increasing Diversity in Clinical Trials: Overcoming Critical Barriers, Luther Clark MD et al., 2019. See also: https://
www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0146280618301889, accessed December 18, 2019.
16. Clinical trials, NHS, 2019. See also: https://www.nhs.uk/conditions/clinical-trials/, accessed December 18, 2019.
17. Factors associated with clinical trials that fail and opportunities for improving the likelihood of success: A review, 
Contemporary Clinical Trials Communications, David B. Fogel, 2018. See also: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/
pmc/articles/PMC6092479/, accessed December 18, 2019.
18. Trends in clinical success rates and therapeutic focus, Helen Dowden and Jamie Munro, 2019. See also: https://
www.nature.com/articles/d41573-019-00074-z, accessed December 20, 2019.EndnotesIntelligent clinical trials

27
19. The High Price Of Failed Clinical Trials: Time To Rethink The Model, Ralf Huss, 2019. See also: https://www.
clinicalleader.com/doc/the-high-price-of-failed-clinical-trials-time-to-rethink-the-model-0001, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
20. Estimation of clinical trial success rates and related parameters, Chi Heem Wong et al., Biostatistics, 2018. See 
also: https://academic.oup.com/biostatistics/article/20/2/273/4817524, accessed December 18, 2019.
21. Ten years on: Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation 2019, Mark Steedman et al., 2019. See 
also: https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/measuring-re turn-from-
pharmaceutical-innovation.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
22. Cancer Drugs Now Account for 27% of all New Drug Approvals in the U.S., According to Tufts Center for 
the Study of Drug Development, GlobeNewswire, 2019. See also: https://www.globenewswire.com/news-
release/2019/09/03/1910034/0/en/Cancer-Drugs-Now-Account-for-27-of-all-New-Drug-Approvals-in-the-U-S-
According-to-Tufts-Center-for-the-Study-of-Drug-Development.html, accessed December 19, 2019.
23. Ten years on: Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation 2019, Mark Steedman et al., 2019. See 
also: https://www2.deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/measuring-return-from-
pharmaceutical-innovation.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
24. Key design considerations for adaptive clinical trials: a primer for clinicians, Kristian Thorlund et al., BMJ, 2018, 
https://www.bmj.com/content/360/bmj.k698, accessed December 18, 2019.
25. Improving Pharma R&D Efficiency, ICON Plc, 2019. See also: https://iconplc.com/insights/transforming-trials/
improving-pharma-research-and-development-efficiency/, accessed December 18, 2019.
26. Master Protocols: Efficient Clinical Trial Design Strategies To Expedite Development of Oncology Drugs and 
Biologics, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2018. See also: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/
search-fda-guidance-documents/master-protocols-efficient-clinical-trial-design-strategies-expedite-
development-oncology-drugs-and, accessed December 18, 2019.
27. Master protocols: Shifting the drug development paradigm, Neil Lesser et al., 2018. See also: https://www2.
deloitte.com/content/dam/insights/us/articles/4509_Master-protocols/DI_Master-protocols.pdf, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
28. Synthetic control arms can save time and money in clinical trials, Jen Goldsack, 2019. See also: https://www.
statnews.com/2019/02/05/synthetic-control-arms-clinical-trials/, accessed December 18, 2019.
29. One Size No Longer Fits All: The Personalized Medicine Trial Landscape, Doro Shin, 2017. See also: https://
invivo.pharmaintelligence.informa.com/IV005051/One-Size-No-Longer-Fits-All-The-Personalized-Medicine-Trial-
Landscape, accessed December 18, 2019.
30. Intelligent drug discovery: Powered by AI, Francesca Properzi et al., 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/
us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/artificial-intelligence-biopharma-intelligent-drug-discovery.html, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
31. Ibid.
32. Artificial Intelligence for Clinical Trial Design, Stefan Harrer et al., 2019. See also: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0165614719301300, accessed December 18, 2019.
33. Ibid.
34. Novartis uses AI to get insights from clinical trial data, Healthcare Weekly, 2019. See also: https://health 
careweekly.com/artificial-intelligence-in-pharmacology/, accessed December 18, 2019.
35. Digital R&D: Transforming the future of clinical development, Dawn Anderson et al., 2018. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-research-and-development-clinical-strategy.
html?id=us:2el:3pr:4di3967:5awa:6di:MMDDYY, accessed December 18, 2019.
36. Intelligent biopharma: Forging the links across the value chain, Mark Steedman et al., 2019. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/rise-of-artificial-intelligence-in-biopharma-industry.
html, accessed December 18, 2019.Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

28
37. Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and 
Biological Products Guidance for Industry, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2019. See also: https://
www.fda.gov/media/121320/download, accessed December 18, 2019.
38. Advances in Electronic Phenotyping: From Rule-Based Definitions to Machine Learning Models, Juan M. Banda et 
al., Annual Review of Biomedical Data Science, 2018. See also: https://www.annualreviews.org/doi/full/10.1146/
annurev-biodatasci-080917-013315, accessed December 18, 2019.
39. Enrichment Strategies for Clinical Trials to Support Determination of Effectiveness of Human Drugs and 
Biological Products Guidance for Industry, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2019. See also: https://
www.fda.gov/media/121320/download, accessed December 18, 2019.
40. Artificial Intelligence for Clinical Trial Design, Stefan Harrer et al., 2019. See also: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0165614719301300, accessed December 18, 2019.
41. Regulatory Science to 2025, European Medicines Agency (EMA), 2018. See also: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/
about-us/how-we-work/regulatory-science-2025, accessed December 18, 2019.
42. Mayo Clinic’s clinical trial matching project sees higher enrollment in breast cancer trials through use of artificial 
intelligence, Rhoda Madson, 2018. See also: https://newsnetwork.mayoclinic.org/discussion/mayo-clinics-clinical-
trial-matching-project-sees-higher-enrolment-in-breast-cancer-trials-through-use-of-artificial-intelligence/, 
accessed December 18, 2019.
43. Cognitive technology addressing optimal cancer clinical trial matching and protocol feasibility in a community 
cancer practice, J. Thaddeus Beck et al., Journal of Clinical Oncology, 2017. See also: https://ascopubs.org/doi/
abs/10.1200/JCO.2017.35.15_suppl.6501, accessed December 18, 2019.
44. Inspire and Antidote Launch End-to-End Clinical Trial Recruitment Solution to Accelerate Medical Research, 
Globe Newswire, 2018. See also: https://www.globenewswire.com/news-release/2018/01/04/1283227/0/en/
Inspire-and-Antidote-Launch-End-to-End-Clinical-Trial-Recruitment-Solution-to-Accelerate-Medical-Research.
html, accessed January 13, 2020.
45. Company, Mendel. See also: https://www.mendel.ai/company, accessed December 18, 2019.
46. Improving Clinical Trial Participant Prescreening With Artificial Intelligence (AI): A Comparison of the Results of 
AI-Assisted vs Standard Methods in 3 Oncology Trials, Denise Calaprice-Whitty et al., Sage Journals, 2019. See 
also: https://journals.sagepub.com/doi/10.1177/2168479018815454, accessed December 19, 2019.
47. Clinical Trial Site Selection: Best Practices, Angie Sullivan, 2018. See also: https://www.rcri-inc.com/clinical-trial-
site-selection-best-practices/, accessed December 18, 2019.
48. The Next Step: Using AI to Formulate Clinical Trial Research Questions, Anju Software, 2019. See also: https://
anjusoftware.com/about/all-news/insights/ai-trial-research-questions/, accessed December 19, 2019.
49. Recruitment Infographic, CLINPAL. See also: https://www.clinpal.com/blog/recruitment-infographic/,  
accessed December 18, 2019.
50. Artificial Intelligence for Clinical Trial Design, Stefan Harrer et al., 2019. See also: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0165614719301300, accessed December 18, 2019.
51. From evidence-based medicine to digital-based health, pharmaphorum, 2018. See also: https://pharmaphorum.
com/digital/evidence-based-medicine-digital-based/, accessed January 27, 2020.
52. Current Health’s AI-Powered Remote Patient Monitoring Device Gets FDA Clearance, Sam Draper, 2019. See 
also: https://www.wearable-technologies.com/2019/04/current-healths-ai-powered-remote-patient-monitoring-
device-gets-fda-clearance/, accessed January 27, 2020.
53. The innovative startups improving clinical trial recruitment, enrollment, retention, and design, Jack Kaufman, 
2018. See also: https://www.mobihealthnews.com/content/innovative-startups-improving-clinical-trial-
recruitment-enrollment-retention-and-design, accessed December 18, 2019.
54. Medidata Launches Acorn AI For End-to-End Data Insights, Bio IT World, 2019. See also: http://www.bio-itworld.
com/2019/05/14/medidata-launches-acorn-ai-for-end-to-end-data-insights.aspx, accessed December 18, 2019.Intelligent clinical trials

29
55. Digital R&D: Transforming the future of clinical development, Dawn Anderson et al., 2018. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-research-and-development-clinical-strategy.
html?id=us:2el:3pr:4di3967:5awa:6di:MMDDYY, accessed December 18, 2019.
56. Why digital medicine depends on interoperability, Moritz Lehne et al., 2019. See also: https://www.nature.com/
articles/s41746-019-0158-1, accessed December 19, 2019.
57. Leverage operational data with clinical trial analytics: Take three minutes to learn how analytics can help, 
Aditya Kudumala, 2017. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/deloitte-analytics/articles/Leverage-
operational-data-with-clinical-trial-analytics.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
58. Pharma is shuffling around jobs, but a skills gap threatens the process, Jacob Bell, 2019. See also: https://www.
biopharmadive.com/news/pharma-is-shuffling-around-jobs-but-a-skills-gap-threatens-the-process/546813/, 
accessed December 19, 2019.
59. Balancing the R&D equation: Measuring the return from pharmaceutical innovation 2016, Karen Taylor et al., 
2016. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/uk/Documents/life-sciences-health care/
deloitte-uk-measuring-the-return-pharma-report-2016.pdf, accessed December 18, 2019.
60. 2019 Global life sciences outlook: Focus and transform | Accelerating change in life sciences, Greg Reh et al., 
2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/global-life-
sciences-sector-outlook.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
61. Research and Markets: The New 2015 Trends of Global Clinical Development Outsourcing Market, Business 
Wire, 2015. See also: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20150130005621/en/Research-Markets-New-
2015-Trends-Global-Clinical, accessed December 19, 2019.
62. Top 10 CROs – 2019, Pharma Tech Outlook, 2019. See also: https://contract-research-organization.
pharmatechoutlook.com/vendors/top-cros-2019.html, accessed December 19, 2019.
63. The Global Contract Research Organizations (CRO) Market was Valued at $36.27 Billion in 2017 and is Expected 
to Reach $56.34 Billion by 2023 - Key Market Analysis, 2018 - ResearchAndMarkets.com, Business Wire, 
2018. See also: https://www.businesswire.com/news/home/20181106005397/en/Global-Contract-Research-
Organizations-CRO-Market-Valued, accessed December 19, 2019.
64. The 10 Best Global Contract Research Organizations (CROs) in 2018, David Hunkar, 2018. See also: https://
topforeignstocks.com/2018/09/29/the-10-best-global-contract-research-organizations-cros-in-2018/, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
65. Intelligent drug discovery: Powered by AI, Francesca Properzi et al., 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/
us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/artificial-intelligence-biopharma-intelligent-drug-discovery.html, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
66. AI for drug discovery, biomarker development and advanced R&D landscape overview 2019/Q3, Deep 
Knowledge Analytics, 2019. See also: https://ai-pharma.dka.global/ai-for-dd-2019-q3/, accessed December 18, 
2019.
67. About us, Trial.ai. See also: https://www.trials.ai/about-us, accessed December 18, 2019.
68. AI and Machine Learning for Clinical Trials – Examining 3 Current Applications, Kumba Sennaar, 2019. See also: 
https://emerj.com/ai-sector-overviews/ai-machine-learning-clinical-trials-examining-x-current-applications/, 
accessed December 18, 2019.
69. The System of Intelligence for Precision Oncology, Concerto HealthAI. See also: https://concertohealthai.com/, 
accessed December 18, 2019.
70. Insights to Cure Disease and Heal Healthcare, GNS Healthcare. See also: https://www.gnshealth care.
com/#slide-3, accessed December 18, 2019.
71. Verily signs up four big pharmas to its clinical trials platform, pharmaphorum, 2019. See also: https://
pharmaphorum.com/news/verily-signs-up-four-big-pharmas-to-its-clinical-trials-platform/, accessed December 
18, 2019.Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

30
72. Apple announces three groundbreaking health studies, Apple Inc., 2019. See also: https://www.apple.com/
newsroom/2019/09/apple-announces-three-groundbreaking-health-studies/, accessed December 18, 2019.
73. Amazon Comprehend Medical, Amazon Web Services Inc., 2018. See also: https://aws.amazon.com/
comprehend/medical/, accessed December 18, 2019.
74. Improve clinical trial outcomes by using AWS technologies, Mayank Thakkar et al., 2019. See also: https://aws.
amazon.com/blogs/big-data/improve-clinical-trial-outcomes-by-using-aws-technologies/, accessed December 18, 
2019.
75. NAVIFY® clinical decision support apps, Roche Diagnostics, 2019. See also: https://diagnostics.roche.com/us/en/
navify-decision-support/navify-clinical-decision-support-apps.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
76. GSK Uses Apple ResearchKit In Rheumatoid Study, Ed Miseta, 2017. See also: https://www.clinicalleader.com/
doc/gsk-uses-apple-researchkit-in-rheumatoid-study-0001, accessed December 18, 2019.
77. Novartis launches FocalView app, providing opportunity for patients to participate in ophthalmology clinical 
trials from home, Novartis, 2018. See also: https://www.novartis.com/news/media-releases/novartis-launches-
focalview-app-providing-opportunity-patients-participate-ophthalmology-clinical-trials-from-home, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
78. Bringing together deep bioscience and AI to help patients worldwide: Novartis and Microsoft work to reinvent 
treatment discovery and development, Peter Lee, 2019. See also: https://blogs.microsoft.com/blog/2019/10/01/
bringing-together-deep-bioscience-and-ai-to-help-patients-worldwide-novartis-and-microsoft-work-to-reinvent-
treatment-discovery-and-development/, accessed December 18, 2019.
79. 2019 Global life sciences outlook: Focus and transform | Accelerating change in life sciences, Greg Reh et al., 
2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/global/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/global-life-
sciences-sector-outlook.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
80. Cloud-based machine learning in health care creates patient-centered treatments, Deborshi Dutt and Rajeev 
Vasudeva, 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/content/dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/deloitte-cloud-case-
studies-caselet-takeda.PDF, accessed December 18, 2019.
81. Force of change: The future of health, Neal Batra et al., 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/
insights/industry/health care/forces-of-change-health care.html, accessed December 18, 2019.
82. Survey finds biopharma companies lag in digital transformation, Greg Reh et al., 2018. See also: https://www2.
deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-transformation-biopharma.html, accessed December 
18, 2019.
83. The Virtual Body That Could Make Clinical Trials Unnecessary, Dr. Bertalan Meskó, The Medical Futurist, 2019. 
See also: https://www.theatlantic.com/sponsored/vmware-2017/virtual-body/1625/, accessed December 18, 
2019.
84. Modernizing Clinical Trials: Digital Technologies and the Cloud, Amazon Web Services Inc., 2019. See also: 
https://d1.awsstatic.com/Industries/HCLS/AWS_ClinicalTrials_Whitepaper_Final.pdf, accessed December 18, 
2019.
85. Virtual Bodies For Real Drugs: In Silico Clinical Trials Are The Future, The Medical Futurist, 2019. See also: https://
medicalfuturist.com/in-silico-trials-are-the-future/, accessed December 18, 2019.
86. In silico clinical trials: how computer simulation will transform the biomedical industry, Marco Viceconti et al., 
International Journal of Clinical Trials, 2016. See also: https://www.ijclinicaltrials.com/index.php/ijct/article/
view/105/72, accessed December 18, 2019.
87. Digital R&D: Transforming the future of clinical development, Dawn Anderson et al., 2018. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-research-and-development-clinical-strategy.
html?id=us:2el:3pr:4di3967:5awa:6di:MMDDYY, accessed December 18, 2019.Intelligent clinical trials

31
88. Submitting Documents Using Real-World Data and Real-World Evidence to FDA for Drugs and Biologics 
Guidance for Industry, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2019. See also: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-
information/search-fda-guidance-documents/submitting-documents-using-real-world-data-and-real-world-
evidence-fda-drugs-and-biologics-guidance, accessed December 18, 2019.
89. Use of Real-World Evidence to Support Regulatory Decision-Making for Medical Devices, U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA), 2017. See also: https://www.fda.gov/regulatory-information/search-fda-guidance-
documents/use-real-world-evidence-support-regulatory-decision-making-medical-devices, accessed December 
18, 2019.
90. 21st Century Cures Act, U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA), 2018. See also: https://www.fda.gov/
regulatory-information/selected-amendments-fdc-act/21st-century-cures-act, accessed December 18, 2019.
91. Breaking Down Barriers Between Clinical Trials and Clinical Care: Incorporating Real World Evidence into 
Regulatory Decision Making, Speech by Scott Gottlieb, M.D., 2019. See also: https://www.fda.gov/news-events/
speeches-fda-officials/breaking-down-barriers-between-clinical-trials-and-clinical-care-incorporating-real-world-
evidence, accessed December 18, 2019.
92. Ibid.
93. Ibid.
94. Digital R&D: Transforming the future of clinical development, Dawn Anderson et al., 2018. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/digital-research-and-development-clinical-strategy.
html, accessed December 18, 2019.
95. Remote Decentralized Clinical Trials Could Solve RCT Problems, Francesca Bruce, 2019. See also: https://pink.
pharmaintelligence.informa.com/PS141239/Remote-Decentralized-Clinical-Trials-Could-Solve-RCT-Problems, 
accessed December 18, 2019.
96. How Novartis Is Making SENSE Of Clinical Data In Digital Age, Kevin Grogan, 2019. See also: https://scrip.
pharmaintelligence.informa.com/SC124623/How-Novartis-Is-Making-SENSE-Of-Clinical-Data-In-Digital-Age, 
accessed December 18, 2019.
97. A bold future for life sciences regulation: Predictions 2025, Karen Taylor et al., 2018. See also: https://www2.
deloitte.com/uk/en/pages/life-sciences-and-health care/articles/life-sciences-predictions-2025.html, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
98. Intelligent drug discovery: Powered by AI, Francesca Properzi et al., 2019. See also: https://www2.deloitte.com/
us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/artificial-intelligence-biopharma-intelligent-drug-discovery.html, accessed 
December 18, 2019.
99. Intelligent biopharma: Forging the links across the value chain, Mark Steedman et al., 2019. See also: https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/life-sciences/rise-of-artificial-intelligence-in-biopharma-industry.
html, accessed December 18, 2019.Transforming through AI-enabled engagement

32
Intelligent clinical trials
About the authors
Karen Taylor | kartaylor@deloitte.co.uk
Karen Taylor is the Research Director of the Deloitte UK Centre for Health Solutions. She supports the Life 
Sciences and Health Care and Public Sector Health practices by driving independent and objective business 
research and analysis into key industry challenges and associated solutions, generating evidence-based 
insights and points of view on issues from pharmaceuticals and technology innovation to health care man-
agement and reform. Karen also produces a weekly blog on topical issues facing the life sciences and health 
care industries.
Francesca Properzi | fproperzi@deloitte.co.uk
Francesca Properzi is a Research Manager in the Deloitte UK Centre for Health Solutions. She supports the 
Life Sciences and Health Care and Public Sector Health practices through creative thinking, robust research 
and her industry experience to develop evidence-based perspectives on some of the biggest and most  
challenging industry issues. She has a PhD in neuronal regeneration from Cambridge University, and  
she recently completed an executive MBA at the Imperial College Business School in London focused on 
innovation in life sciences and health care.
Maria João Cruz | mariajoaocruz@deloitte.co.uk
Maria João is a Research Analyst for The Centre for Health Solutions, the independent research hub of the 
Health Care and Life Sciences team. At the Centre she conducts rigorous analysis and research to generate 
insights that support the practice across life sciences and health care. Before joining Deloitte, Maria João was 
a postgraduate researcher in Bioengineering at Imperial College London, jointly working with Instituto 
Superior Técnico, University of Lisbon. She holds a BSc and MSc in Biological Engineering from IST, Lisbon.
Hanno Ronte | hronte@deloitte.co.uk
Hanno Ronte is a Partner at Monitor Deloitte, our strategy consultancy business. He has more than 20 years 
of consulting experience primarily in the life sciences and health care sector. Hanno leads the Life Sciences 
and Health Care team in Monitor Deloitte and is responsible for building the Real World Evidence Capability 
within that. His projects have focused on corporate and business unit strategy, competitive response,  
marketing strategy and capability building.
John Haughey | jhaughey@deloitte.co.uk
John Haughey is Deloitte’s Global Life Sciences Consulting Leader and the Life Sciences and Health Care 
Industry Leader for the UK. He has extensive experience in the industry as well as more broadly across sec-
tors, having led multiple large-scale business and operational transformations over the past 30 years. He has 
operated across the full project life cycle from feasibility through implementation. He specialises in optimis-
ing global business operations, covering strategy, M&A integration and divestment, operational and financial 
improvement, ERP implementation, global business services, analytics and outsourcing.

33
Contact us
Our insights can help you take advantage of change. If you’re looking for fresh ideas to address your 
challenges, we should talk.Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the following Deloitte colleagues that helped with the report: Pratik Avhad 
(Deloitte LLP), Sebastien Burnett (Deloitte MCS), Kevin Dondarsky (Deloitte Consulting LLP), Mark Steedman 
(Deloitte LLP), Mark Stockbridge (Deloitte MCS), Naveed Panjwani (Deloitte MCS), Sebastian Payne (Deloitte 
LLP), Pavithra Rallapalli (Deloitte MCS).
Industry leadership
Colin Terry
Partner | LSHC Research and Development | Deloitte North & South Europe
+44 (0) 20 7007 0658 | colterry@deloitte.co.uk
John Haughey
Partner | Global LSHC Consulting Lead and UK LSHC Industry Lead | Deloitte North & South Europe  
+44 (0) 20 7303 7472 | jhaughey@deloitte.co.uk
Peter Wallace
Partner | LSHC Digital Transformation leader | Deloitte North & South Europe
+44 (0) 20 7007 5343 | pwallace@deloitte.co.uk
Vicky Levy
Partner | LSHC Industry Lead for Deloitte North & South Europe | Deloitte North & South Europe
+ 41 (0) 58 279 7877 | vilevy@deloitte.ch
Hanno Ronte
Partner | Life Sciences and Health Care | Deloitte North & South Europe
+44 (0) 20 7007 2540 | hronte@deloitte.co.uk
Niel Lesser
Leader | Principal Life Science R&D Practice Leader Deloitte Consulting LLP | Deloitte US
+1 (215) 446 4364 | nlesser@deloitte.com
Amy Cheung
Principal Deloitte Consulting LLP 
+1 (215) 380 2876 | amyycheung@deloitte.com
Aditya Kudumala
Principal Deloitte Consulting
+1 (646) 498 6956 | akudumala@deloitte.comTransforming through AI-enabled engagement

Sign up for Deloitte Insights updates at www.deloitte.com/insights. 
  Follow @DeloitteInsight
Deloitte Insights contributors
Editorial: Sara Sikora
Creative: Mark Milward
Promotion: Maria Martin Cirujano
Cover artwork: Taylor Callery
About Deloitte Insights
Deloitte Insights publishes original articles, reports and periodicals that provide insights for businesses, the public sector and 
NGOs. Our goal is to draw upon research and experience from throughout our professional services organization, and that of 
coauthors in academia and business, to advance the conversation on a broad spectrum of topics of interest to executives and 
government leaders.
Deloitte Insights is an imprint of Deloitte Development LLC.
About this publication
This publication has been written in general terms and therefore cannot be relied on to cover specific situations; application of 
the principles set out will depend upon the particular circumstances involved and we recommend that you obtain professional 
advice before acting or refraining from acting on any of the contents of this publication. This publication and the information 
contained herein is provided “as is,” and Deloitte University EMEA CVBA makes no express or implied representations or 
warranties in this respect and does not warrant that the publication or information will be error-free or will meet any particular 
criteria of performance or quality. Deloitte University EMEA CVBA accepts no duty of care or liability for any loss occasioned to 
any person acting or refraining from action as a result of any material in this publication.
About Deloitte
Deloitte provides audit, consulting, financial advisory, risk management, tax and related services to public and private clients 
spanning multiple industries. With a globally connected network of member firms in more than 150 countries and territories, 
Deloitte brings world class capabilities and high-quality service to clients, delivering the insights they need to address their most 
complex business challenges.
© 2020 Deloitte University EMEA CVBA.
Responsible publisher: Deloitte University EMEA CVBA, with registered office at B-1831 Diegem, Berkenlaan 8b

