The Qualitativ e Repor t The Qualitativ e Repor t 
Volume 13 Number 4 Article 2 
12-1-2008 
Qualitativ e Case Study Methodology: Study Design and Qualitativ e Case Study Methodology: Study Design and 
Implementation for No vice Resear chers Implementation for No vice Resear chers 
Pamela Baxter 
McMaster Univ ersity , baxterp@mcmaster .ca 
Susan Jack 
McMaster Univ ersity , jacksm@mcmaster .ca 
Follow this and additional works at: https:/ /nsuworks.no va.edu/tqr 
 Part of the Quantitativ e, Qualitativ e, Compar ative, and Hist orical Methodologies Commons , and the 
Social Statistics Commons 
Recommended AP A Citation Recommended AP A Citation 
Baxter , P., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualitativ e Case Study Methodology: Study Design and Implementation for 
Novice Resear chers. The Qualitativ e Repor t, 13(4), 544-559. https:/ /doi.or g/10.46743/2160-3715/
2008.1573 
This Ar ticle is br ought t o you for fr ee and open access b y the The Qualitativ e Repor t at NSUW orks. It has been 
accepted for inclusion in The Qualitativ e Repor t by an authoriz ed administr ator of NSUW orks. F or mor e 
information, please contact nsuworks@no va.edu . 

Qualitativ e Case Study Methodology: Study Design and Implementation for Qualitativ e Case Study Methodology: Study Design and Implementation for 
Novice Resear chers Novice Resear chers 
Abstr act Abstr act 
Qualitativ e case study methodology pr ovides t ools for r esear chers t o study complex phenomena within 
their contexts. When the appr oach is applied corr ectly , it becomes a v aluable method for health science 
resear ch to de velop theor y, evaluate pr ograms, and de velop inter ventions. The purpose of this paper is t o 
guide the no vice r esear cher in identifying the k ey elements for designing and implementing qualitativ e 
case study r esear ch pr ojects. An o verview of the types of case study designs is pr ovided along with 
gener al recommendations for writing the r esear ch questions, de veloping pr opositions, determining the 
“case ” under study , binding the case and a discussion of data sour ces and triangulation. T o facilitate 
application of these principles, clear examples of r esear ch questions, study pr opositions and the diff erent 
types of case study designs ar e provided 
Keywor ds Keywor ds 
Case Study and Qualitativ e Method 
Creativ e Commons License Creativ e Commons License 
This work is licensed under a Creativ e Commons A ttribution-Noncommer cial-Shar e Alik e 4.0 International 
License . 
This ar ticle is a vailable in The Qualitativ e Repor t: https:/ /nsuworks.no va.edu/tqr/v ol13/iss4/2 

The Qualitative Report  Volume 13 Number 4 December 2008 544-559 
http://www.nova.edu/ssss/ QR/QR13-4/baxter.pdf 
 
Qualitative Case Study Meth odology: Study Design and 
Implementation for Novice Researchers 
 
Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack 
McMaster University, West Hamilton, Ontario, Canada  
 
Qualitative case study methodology prov ides tools for researchers to study 
complex phenomena within  their contexts. When the approach is applied 
correctly, it becomes a valuable method for health science research to develop theory, evaluate programs, and develop interventions. The purpose of this paper is to  guide the novice research er in identifying the 
key elements for designing and implementing qualitative case study research projects. An overview of the types of case study designs is 
provided along with general recomme ndations for writing the research 
questions, developing propositions, determining the “case” under study, binding the case and a discussion of data sources and triangulation. To 
facilitate application of these principles, clear examples of research questions, study propositions  and the different types of case study designs 
are provided. Key Words: Case Study and Qualitative Methods 
 
 
Introduction 
 
To graduate students and research ers unfamiliar with case study methodology, 
there is often misunderstanding about what a case study is and how it, as a form of 
qualitative research, can inform professi onal practice or evidence-informed decision 
making in both clinical and policy realms. In a graduate level introductory qualitative 
research methods course, we have listened to  novice researchers describe their views of 
case studies and their perceptions of it as a me thod only to be used to  study individuals or 
specific historical events, or as a teachi ng strategy to holistically understand exemplary 
“cases.” It has been a privilege to teach th ese students that rigo rous qualitative case 
studies afford researchers opportunities to explore or describe a phenomenon in context 
using a variety of data sources. It allows  the researcher to ex plore individuals or 
organizations, simple through complex inte rventions, relationships, communities, or 
programs (Yin, 2003) and supports the deconstr uction and the subsequent reconstruction 
of various phenomena. This approach is valuab le for health science research to develop 
theory, evaluate programs, and develop interventions because of its flexibility and rigor. 
 
Background 
 
 This qualitative case study is an approach to research that facilitates exploration 
of a phenomenon within its  context using a variety of data  sources. This ensures that the 
issue is not explored through one lens, but  rather a variety of le nses which allows for 
multiple facets of the phenomenon to be revealed and understood. There are two key 
approaches that guide case study methodology;  one proposed by Robert Stake (1995) and 

545  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
the second by Robert Yin (2003, 2006). Both seek to ensure that the topic of interest is 
well explored, and that the essence of the phenomenon is revealed, but the methods that 
they each employ are quite different and ar e worthy of discussion. For a more lengthy 
treatment of case study methods we encourage you to read Hancock and Algozzine’s, Doing case study research: A practic al guide for beginning researchers (2006). 
 
Philosophical Underpinnings 
 
 First, both Stake (1995) and Yin (2003)  base their approach to case study on a 
constructivist paradigm. Constructivists claim that  truth is relative and that it is dependent 
on one’s perspective. This paradigm “recogn izes the importance of the subjective human 
creation of meaning, but doesn’t  reject outright some notion of objectivity. Pluralism, not 
relativism, is stressed with focus on the ci rcular dynamic tension of subject and object” 
(Miller & Crabtree, 1999, p. 10). Constructivis m is built upon the premise of a social 
construction of reality (Searle, 1995). One of the advantages of  this approach is the close 
collaboration between the researcher and the participant, while enabling participants to tell their stories (C rabtree & Miller, 1999).
  Through these stories the participants are 
able to describe their views of reality and this enables the researcher to better understand 
the participants’ actions (Lathe r, 1992; Robottom & Hart, 1993). 
 
When to Use a Case Study Approach 
 
 So when should you use a case study approach? According to Yin (2003) a case 
study design should be considered when: (a) the focus of the study is to answer “how” 
and “why” questions; (b) you cannot manipulate the behaviour of those involved in the 
study; (c) you want to cover contextual condi tions because you believe  they are relevant 
to the phenomenon under study;  or (d) the boundaries ar e not clear between the 
phenomenon and context. For instance, a study of the decision making of nursing 
students conducted by Baxter (2006) sought to determine the types of decisions made by 
nursing students and the factors that infl uenced the decision making. A case study was 
chosen because the case was the decision ma king of nursing students, but the case could 
not be considered without the context, the School of Nursing, and more specifically the 
clinical and classroom settings. It was in these settings that th e decision making skills 
were developed and utilized. It would have been  impossible for this author to have a true 
picture of nursing student de cision making without consider ing the context within which 
it occurred. 
 
Determining the Case/Unit of Analysis 
 
While you are considering what your rese arch question will be, you must also 
consider what the case is. This may sound simple, but determining what the unit of 
analysis (case) is can be a challenge for both novice and seasoned researchers alike. The 
case is defined by Miles and Huberman (1994)  as, “a phenomenon of some sort occurring 
in a bounded context. The case is, “in effect , your unit of analysis” (p. 25). Asking 
yourself the following questions can help to determine what your case is; do I want to 
“analyze” the individual? Do I want to “analy ze” a program? Do I want to “analyze” the 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  546 
process? Do I want to “analyze” the diffe rence between organizations? Answering these 
questions along with talking wi th a colleague can be effec tive strategies to further 
delineate your case. For example, your quest ion might be, “How do women in their 30s 
who have had breast cancer decide whether or not to have breast reconstruction?” In this 
example, the case could be the decision maki ng process of women between the age of 30 
and 40 years who have experienced breast cancer. However, it may be that you are less interested in the activity of decision making and more interest ed in focussing specifically 
on the experiences of 30-40 year old women. In  the first example, the case would be the 
decision making of this group of women and it would be a process being analyzed, but in 
the second example the case would be focussi ng on an analysis of individuals or the 
experiences of 30 year old wo men. What is examined has sh ifted in these examples (See 
Case Examples #1 and #2 in Table 1).  
 
Table 1 
 
Developing Case Study Research Questions  
Case Examples The Research Questions 
1. The decision making process of women 
between the age of 30 and 40 years  How do women between the ages of 30 and 
40 years decide  whether or not to have 
reconstructive surgery after a radical mastectomy? What factors influence their decision ?  
 
2. The experiences of 30-40 year old women following radical mastectomy faced with the decision of whether or not to undergo reconstructive surgery How women (30-40 years of age) describe 
their post-op (first 6 months) experiences  
following a radical mastectomy? Do these experiences  influence their decisions 
making related to breast reconstructive surgery? 
3. The decision making process (related to breast reconstruction post-radical mastectomy) of women between the age of 30 and 40 years atte nding four cancer 
centers in Ontario. How do women (ages 30-40) attending 
four different cancer centers in Ontario describe their decision making related to breast reconstructive surgery following a radical mastectomy? 
 
Binding the Case 
 
 Once you have determined what your case will be, you will have to consider what 
your case will NOT be. One of the common pitfa lls associated with case study is that 
there is a tendency for researchers to attempt to answer a question that is too broad or a 
topic that has too many objectives for one study . In order to avoid this problem, several 
authors including Yin (2003) and Stake (1995 ) have suggested that placing boundaries on 
a case can prevent this explosion from o ccurring. Suggestions on how to bind a case 
include: (a) by time and place (C reswell, 2003); (b) time and act ivity (Stake); and (c) by 
definition and context (Miles & Huberman, 1994). Binding the case will  ensure that your 

547  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
study remains reasonable in scope. In th e example of the study involving women who 
must decide whether or not to have recons tructive surgery, established boundaries would 
need to include a concise definition of breas t cancer and reconstructive surgery. I would 
have to indicate where these women were re ceiving care or where they were making 
these decisions and the period of time that we wanted to learn about, for example within 
six months of a radical mastectomy. It woul d be unreasonable for me to look at all 
women in their 30s across Canada who had e xperienced breast cancer and their decisions 
regarding reconstructive surger y. In contrast, I might want to look at single women in 
their 30s who have received car e in a tertiary care center in  a specific hospital in South 
Western Ontario. The boundaries indicate what w ill and will not be studied in the scope 
of the research project. The establishment of  boundaries in a qualita tive case study design 
is similar to the development of inclusion and exclusion criteria for sample selection in a quantitative study. The difference is that thes e boundaries also indi cate the breadth and 
depth of the study and not simply  the sample to be included. 
 
Determining the Type of Case Study 
 
 Once you have determined that the resear ch question is best answered using a 
qualitative case study and the case and its boundaries have been determined, then you 
must consider what type of case study will be conducted. Th e selection of a specific type 
of case study design will be guided by the overall study purpose. Are you looking to 
describe a case, explore a cas e, or compare between cases ? Yin (2003) and Stake (1995) 
use different terms to describe a variety of case studies. Yin  categorizes case studies as 
explanatory, exploratory, or descriptive. He also differen tiates between single, holistic 
case studies and multiple-case studies. Stake identifies case studies as intrinsic, instrumental, or collective. Definitions a nd published examples of these types of case 
studies are provided in Table 2.  
 Table 2  
Definitions and Examples of Di fferent Types of Case Studies  
Case Study Type Definition  Published Study Example 
Explanatory This type of case study 
would be used if you were seeking to answer a question that sought to explain the presumed causal links in real-life interventions that are too complex for the survey or experimental strategies. In evaluation language, the explanations would link program 
implementation with 
program effects (Yin, 2003). Joia (2002). Analysing a web-
based e-commerce learning community: A case study in Brazil. Internet Research, 12 , 
305-317. 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  548 
 
Exploratory This t ype of case study is 
used to explore those situations in which the intervention being evaluated has no clear, single set of outcomes (Yin, 2003). Lotzkar & Bottorff (2001). An 
observational study of the development of a nurse-patient relationship. Clinical Nursing 
Research, 10 , 275-294. 
Descriptive This type of case study is 
used to describe an intervention or phenomenon and the real-life context in which it occurred (Yin, 2003).  Tolson, Fleming, & Schartau 
(2002). Coping with menstruation: Understanding the needs of women with Parkinson’s disease. Journal 
of Advanced Nursing, 40 , 513-
521. 
Multiple-case studies A multiple case study 
enables the researcher to explore differences within and between cases. The goal is to replicate findings across cases. Because comparisons will be drawn, it is imperative that the cases are chosen carefully so that the researcher can predict similar results across cases, or predict contrasting results based on a theory (Yin, 2003).  Campbell & Ahrens (1998). 
Innovative community services for rape victims: An application of multiple case study methodology. American 
Journal of Community 
Psychology , 26, 537-571. 
Intrinsic Stake (1995 ) uses the term 
intrinsic and suggests that researchers who have a genuine interest in the case should use this approach when the intent is to better understand the case. It is not undertaken primarily because the case represents other cases or because it illustrates a particular trait or problem, but because in all its particularity and ordinariness, the case itself is of interest. The purpose is NOT to come to understand some abstract construct or generic phenomenon. The Hellström, Nolan, & Lundh 
(2005). “We do things together” A case study of “couplehood” in dementia. Dementia, 4 (1), 7-22. 

549  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
purpose is NOT to build 
theory (although that is an option; Stake, 1995).  
Instrumental Is used to accomplish 
something other than understanding a particular situation. It provides insight into an issue or helps to refine a theory. The case is of secondary interest; it plays a supportive role, facilitating our understanding of something else. The case is often looked at in depth, its contexts scrutinized, its ordinary activities detailed, and because it helps the researcher pursue the external interest. The case may or may not be seen as typical of other cases (Stake, 1995).  Luck, Jackson, & Usher 
(2007). STAMP: Components of observable behaviour that indicate potential for patient violence in emergency departments. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing, 59 , 11-19.  
Collective Collective case studies are 
similar in nature and description to multiple case studies (Yin, 2003) Scheib (2003). Role stress in 
the professional life of the school music teacher: A collective case study. Journal 
of Research in Music 
Education, 51 ,124-136. 
 
Single or Multiple Case Study Designs 
 Single Case 
 
  In addition to identifying the “case” and the specific “type” of case study to be 
conducted, researchers must consid er if it is prudent to conduct a single case study or if a 
better understanding of the phenomenon will be  gained through conducting a multiple 
case study. If we consider the topic of breast r econstruction surgery again we can begin to 
discuss how to determine the “type” of case study and the necessary number of cases to 
study. A single holistic case might be the d ecision making of one woman or a single 
group of 30 year old women facing brea st reconstruction post-mastectomy. But 
remember that you also have to take into c onsideration the context.  So, are you going to 
look at these women in one envi ronment because it is a unique  or extreme situation? If 
so, you can consider a holisti c single case study (Yin, 2003).  
 
 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  550 
Single Case with Embedded Units 
 
 If you were interested in looking at the same issue, but now were intrigued by the 
different decisions made by women attending di fferent clinics within one hospital, then a 
holistic case study with embedded units would enable the researcher  to explore the case 
while considering the influence of the various  clinics and associated attributes on the 
women’s decision making. The abilit y to look at sub-uni ts that are situated  within a larger 
case is powerful when you consider that data can be analyzed within  the subunits 
separately (within case analysis), between  the different subunits (between case analysis), 
or across  all of the subunits (cross-case analysis).  The ability to engage in such rich 
analysis only serves to better illuminate the case. The pitfall that novice researchers fall 
into is that they analyze at the individual subunit level and fail to return to the global 
issue that they initially se t out to address (Yin, 2003). 
 
Multiple-Case Studies 
 
 If a study contains more than a single case then a multiple-case study is required. 
This is often equated with multiple experi ments. You might find yourself asking, but 
what is the difference between a holistic ca se study with embedded units and a multiple-
case study? Good question! The simp le answer is that the cont ext is different for each of 
the cases. A multiple or collective case study w ill allow the researcher  to analyze within 
each setting and across setti ngs. While a holistic case st udy with embedded units only 
allows the researcher to understand one unique /extreme/critical case. In a multiple case 
study, we are examining several cases to und erstand the similariti es and differences 
between the cases. Yin (2003) describes how mu ltiple case studies can be used to either, 
“(a) predicts similar results (a literal replicat ion) or (b) predicts c ontrasting results but for 
predictable reasons (a theore tical replication)” (p. 47). This type of a design has its 
advantages and disadvantages. Overall, the ev idence created from this type of study is 
considered robust and reliable, but it can also be extremely time consuming and 
expensive to conduct. Continuing with the same example, if you wanted to study women in various health care institutions across th e country, then a multip le or collective case 
study would be indicated. The ca se would still be the decisi on making of women in their 
30s, but you would be able to analyze the di fferent decision-making processes engaged in 
by women in different centers (See Case Example #3 in Table 1).  
 Stake (1995) uses three terms to describe  case studies; intrinsi c, instrumental, and 
collective. If you are interested  in a unique situa tion according to Stake, conduct an 
intrinsic case study. This simply means that you have an intrin sic interest in the subject 
and you are aware that the results have limited transferability. If the intent is to gain 
insight and understanding of a particular situation or phenomenon, then Stake would 
suggest that you use an instrumental case study  to gain understanding. This author also 
uses the term collective case study when mo re than one case is being examined. The 
same example used to describe multi ple case studies can be applied here. 
 Once the case has been determined and the boundaries placed on the case it is 
important to consider the additional com ponents required for designing and implementing 
a rigorous case study. These include: (a) proposi tions (which may or may not be present) 
(Yin, 2003, Miles & Huberman, 1994); (b) the application of a conceptual framework 

551  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
(Miles & Huberman); (c) development of the research questions (generally “how” and/or 
“why” questions); (d) the lo gic linking data to propositio ns; and (e) the criteria for 
interpreting findings (Yin).  
Propositions 
 
Propositions are helpful in any case study, but  they are not always present. When 
a case study proposal includes specific propositions it increa ses the likelihood that the 
researcher will be able to place limits on the scope of the study and increase the 
feasibility of completi ng the project. The more a study co ntains specific propositions, the 
more it will stay within f easible limits. So where do the propositions come from? 
Propositions may come from the literature, personal/professional experience, theories, 
and/or generalizations based on empirical data (Table 3).  
 
Table 3 
 
Case Study Propositions  
Potential Propositions Source 
**These are only examples of literature and 
do not reflect a full literature review. 
Women in their 30s most often decide not to have recons tructive surgery Professional experience and Literature 
 
Handel, Silverstein, Waisman, Waisman, & 
Gierson (1990). Reasons why mastectomy patients do not have breast reconstruction. Plastic Reconstruction 
Surgery , 86(6), 1118-22. 
Morrow, Scott, Menck, Mustoe, & 
Winchester (2001). Factors influencing the use of breast reconstruction postmastectomy: a National Cancer Database Study. Journal of American 
College of Surgeons , 192(1), 69-70. 
Women choose not to have reconstructive 
surgery post mastectomy due to the issues related to acute pain Literature - Wallace, Wallace, Lee, & 
Dobke (1996). Pain after breast surgery: A survey of 282 women. Pain, 66 (2-3), 195-
205. 
Women face many personal and social barriers to breast reconstructive surgery. Professional experience and Literature 
 
Reaby (1998). Reasons Why Women Who 
Have Mastectomy Decide to Have or Not to Have Breast Reconstruction . Plastic & 
Reconstructive Surgery. 101 (7), 1810-
1818.   
 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  552 
Staradub, YiChing Hsieh, Clauson, et al. 
(2002). Factors that influence surgical choices in women with breast carcinoma. Cancer, 95 (6), 1185-1190. 
Women are influenced by their health care 
providers when making this decision Personal experience and literature 
 
Wanzel, Brown, Anastakis, et al. (2002). 
Reconstructive Breast Surgery: Referring physician knowledge and learning needs. Plastic and Reconstructive Surgery, 110 :6 
Women in different regions of Canada 
make different decisions about breast reconstructive surgery post mastectomy Literature 
 
Polednak (2000). Geographic variation in 
postmastectomy breast reconstruction rates. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, 106(2 ), 
298-301. 
 For example, one proposition included in a study on the development of nursing student decision making in a clinical setting stated th at “various factors in fluence nurse decision 
making including the decision maker’s knowledge,  and experience, feelings of fear, and 
degree of confidence” (Baxter, 2000, 2006). This  proposition was based on the literature 
found on the topic of nurse decision maki ng. The researcher can have several 
propositions to guide the study, but each must have a distinct focus and purpose. These 
propositions later guide the data collection and discussion. Each proposition serves to focus the data collection, dete rmine direction and scope of  the study and together the 
propositions form the foundation for a con ceptual structure/framework (Miles & 
Huberman, 1994; Stake, 1995). It should be noted  that propositions may not be present in 
exploratory holistic or intrinsi c case studies due to the fact that the researcher does not 
have enough experience, knowledge, or inform ation from the literature upon which to 
base propositions. For those of you more familiar with quantitative approaches to experimental studies, propositions can be equa ted with hypotheses in that they both make 
an educated guess to the possible outcomes  of the experiment/research study. A common 
pitfall for the novice case study researchers is  to include too many propositions and then 
find that they are overwhelmed by the number of  propositions that must be returned to 
when analyzing the data a nd reporting the findings.  
 
Issues 
 
 To contribute to the confusion that  exists surrounding the implementation of 
different types of qualitative case study appr oaches, where Yin uses “propositions” to 
guide the research process, Stake (1995) appl ies what he terms “issues.” Stake states, 
“issues are not simple and clean, but intricatel y wired to political, so cial, historical, and 
especially personal contexts. All these meani ngs are important in studying cases” (p. 17). 
Both Yin and Stake suggest that the propositi ons and issues are necessary elements in 
case study research in that both lead to the development of a conceptual framework that 
guides the research.  

553  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
Conceptual Framework  
 
Both Stake and Yin refer to conceptual frameworks, but fail to fully describe them 
or provide a model of a conceptual framewor k for reference. One resource that provides 
examples of conceptual frameworks is Mi les and Huberman (1994). These authors note 
that the conceptual framework serves seve ral purposes: (a) identifying who will and will 
not be included in the study;  (b) describing what relations hips may be present based on 
logic, theory and/or experien ce; and (c) providing the researcher with  the opportunity to 
gather general constructs into intellect ual “bins” (Miles & Huberman, p. 18). The 
conceptual framework serves as an anchor fo r the study and is referr ed at the stage of 
data interpretation. For example an initial framework was developed by Baxter, 2003 in 
her exploration of nursing st udent decision making. The framework was based on the 
literature and her personal experiences. Th e major constructs were proposed in the 
following manner: 
 
(Adapted from Baxter, 2003 p. 28) 
The reader will note that the framework does not display relationships between 
the constructs. The framework should continue to develop and be completed as the study 
progresses and the relationships between the proposed constructs will emerge as data are 
analyzed. A final conceptual framework will include all the themes that emerged from 
data analysis. Yin suggests that returning to the propositions that initially formed the 
conceptual framework ensures that the analysis  is reasonable in scope and that it also 
provides structure for the final report. One of the drawbacks of a conceptual framework is 
that it may limit the inductive approach wh en exploring a phenomenon. To safeguard 
against becoming deductive, researchers are encouraged to journal their thoughts and 
decisions and discuss them with other researchers to determine if their thinking has become too driven by the framework. 
  
Types of decisions 
Internal 
influencing 
factors External 
influencing 
factors Decision 
making 
   Time Clinical Setting 
PBL setting 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  554 
Data Sources 
 
A hallmark of case study research is the use of multiple data sources, a strategy 
which also enhances data credibility (P atton, 1990; Yin, 2003). Potential data sources 
may include, but are not limited to: documentati on, archival records, interviews, physical 
artifacts, direct observations, and participan t-observation. Unique in comparison to other 
qualitative approaches, within  case study research, investigat ors can collect and integrate 
quantitative survey data, which facilita tes reaching a holistic understanding of the 
phenomenon being studied. In case study, data from these multiple sources are then converged in the analysis process rather than  handled individually. Ea ch data source is 
one piece of the “puzzle,” with each piece cont ributing to the researcher’s understanding 
of the whole phenomenon. This convergence adds  strength to the findings as the various 
strands of data are braided together to promote a greater understanding of the case. 
Although the opportunity to gather data  from various sources is extremely 
attractive because of the rigor that can be associated with this approach, there are dangers. One of them is the collection of overwhelming amounts of data that require 
management and analysis. Often, researchers find  themselves “lost” in the data. In order 
to bring some order to the data collection a co mputerized data base is often necessary to 
organize and manage the voluminous amount of data. 
 
Database 
 
Both Yin and Stake recognize the importanc e of effectively organizing data. The 
advantage of using a database to accomplish this task is that raw data are available for independent inspection. Using a database improves the reliability of the case study as it enables the researcher to track and organi ze data sources including notes, key documents, 
tabular materials, narratives, photographs, and a udio files can be stored in a database for 
easy retrieval at a later date. Computer Aided Qualitative Data Analysis Software (CAQDAS) provides unlimited “bins” into wh ich data can be collected and then 
organized. In addition to the creation of bins these programs facilitate the recording of source detail, the time and date of the data collection, storage, and search capabilities. These are all important when developing a case study database (Wickham & Woods, 
2005). The advantages and disadv antages of such a database have been described in the 
literature (Richards & Richards, 1994, 1998) one of the greatest drawbacks is the 
distancing of the researcher from the data.  
 
Analysis 
 
As in any other qualitative study the data collection and analysis occur 
concurrently. The type of anal ysis engaged in will depend on the type of case study. Yin 
briefly describes five tec hniques for analysis: patter n matching, linking data to 
propositions, explanation build ing, time-series analysis, lo gic models, and cross-case 
synthesis. In contrast, Stake describes categorical aggregation and direct interpretation as 
types of analysis. Explaining each of these t echniques is beyond the scope of this paper. 
As a novice researcher, it is important to review various types of analysis and to 
determine which approach you are most comfortable with.  

555  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
Yin (2003) notes that one important practi ce during the analysis phase of any case 
study is the return to the propositions (if used ); there are several re asons for this. First, 
this practice leads to a focused analysis when the temptation is to analyze data that are outside the scope of the research questions . Second, exploring rival propositions is an 
attempt to provide an alternate explanation of  a phenomenon. Third, by engaging in this 
iterative process the confidence in the findings is increased as the number of propositions 
and rival propositions are addre ssed and accepted or rejected.  
One danger associated with the analysis phase is that each data source would be 
treated independently and the findings reported separately. This is not the purpose of a 
case study. Rather, the researcher must ensure that th e data are converged in an attempt to 
understand the overall case, not the various part s of the case, or the contributing factors 
that influence the case. As a novice research er, one strategy that will ensure that you 
remain true to the original ca se is to involve othe r research team memb ers in the analysis 
phase and to ask them to provide feedback on yo ur ability to integrate the data sources in 
an attempt to answer the research questions. 
 
Reporting a Case Study 
 
 Reporting a case study can be a difficult task for any researcher due to the 
complex nature of this approach. It is difficult to report the findings in a concise manner, and yet it is the researcher’s responsibi lity to convert a co mplex phenomenon into a 
format that is readily unders tood by the reader. The goal of the report is to describe the 
study in such a comprehensive manner as to enable  the reader to feel as if they had been 
an active participant in the research and can determine wh ether or not the study findings 
could be applied to their own situation. It is  important that the researcher describes the 
context within which the phenomenon is oc curring as well as the phenomenon itself. 
There is no one correct way to  report a case study. However, some suggested ways are by 
telling the reader a story, by providing a chronological report, or by addressing each 
proposition. Addressing the propositions ensu res that the report remains focused and 
deals with the research question. The pitf all in the report writing that many novice 
researchers fall into is bei ng distracted by the mounds of interesting data that are 
superfluous to the research question. Returnin g to the propositions or issues ensures that 
the researcher avoids this pi tfall. In order to  fully understand the findings they are 
compared and contrasted to what can be f ound in published literature in order to situate 
the new data into preexisting data. Yin ( 2003) suggests six methods  for reporting a case 
study. These include: linear, comparative, ch ronological, theory bu ilding, suspense, and 
unsequenced (Refer to Yin for full descriptions).   
Strategies for Achieving Trustworthiness in Case Study Research 
 
 Numerous frameworks have been develope d to evaluate the rigor or assess the 
trustworthiness of qualita tive data (e.g., Guba, 1981; Lincoln & Guba, 1985) and 
strategies for establishing credibility, tr ansferability, dependability, and confirmability 
have been extensively written about acro ss fields (e.g., Krefti ng, 1991; Sandelowski, 
1986, 1993). General guidelines for critically a ppraising qualitative research have also 
been published (e.g., Forchuk & Roberts, 1993; Mays & Pope, 2000).  

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  556 
For the novice researcher, designing and implementing a case study project, there 
are several basic key elements to the study design that can be integrated to enhance 
overall study quality or trus tworthiness. Researchers usi ng this method will want to 
ensure enough detail is provide d so that readers can assess th e validity or credibility of 
the work. As a basic foundation to achieve th is, novice researchers have a responsibility 
to ensure that: (a) the case study research  question is clearly written, propositions (if 
appropriate to the case study t ype) are provided, and the question is substantiated; (b) 
case study design is appropriate for the re search question; (c) purposeful sampling 
strategies appropriate for cas e study have been applied; (d) data are collected and 
managed systematically; and (e) the data are analyzed correctly (Russell, Gregory, Ploeg, 
DiCenso, & Guyatt, 2005). Case study research design princi ples lend themselves to 
including numerous strategies that prom ote data credibility or “truth value.” 
Triangulation of data sources, data types or re searchers is a primary strategy that can be 
used and would support the principle in ca se study research that the phenomena be 
viewed and explored from multiple perspectives. The collection and comparison of this data enhances data quality based on the principles of idea convergence and the 
confirmation of findings (Knafl & Breitmay er, 1989). Novice researchers should also 
plan for opportunities to have  either a prolonged or inte nse exposure to the phenomenon 
under study within its context so that rapport with participants can be established and so 
that multiple perspectives can be collected and understood and to reduce potential for social desirability responses in interviews  (Krefting, 1991). As data are collected and 
analyzed, researchers may also wish to in tegrate a process of member checking, where 
the researchers’ interpretations of the data  are shared with the participants, and the 
participants have the opportuni ty to discuss and clarify the interpretation, and contribute 
new or additional perspectives on the issu e under study. Additional strategies commonly 
integrated into qualitative studies to establis h credibility include the use of reflection or 
the maintenance of field notes and peer examination of the data. At the analysis stage, the 
consistency of the findings or “dependability ” of the data can be promoted by having 
multiple researchers independently code a set of  data and then meet together to come to 
consensus on the emerging codes and categories. Researchers may also choose to implement a process of double coding where a set of data are code d, and then after a 
period of time the researcher returns and code s the same data set and compares the results 
(Krefting). 
 
Conclusion 
 
 Case study research is more than simply conducting research on a single 
individual or situation. This  approach has the potential to deal with simple through 
complex situations. It enables the researcher to answer “how” and “why” type questions, while taking into consideration how a pheno menon is influenced by the context within 
which it is situated. For the novice research a case study is  an excellent opportunity to 
gain tremendous insight into a case. It enables the researcher to  gather data from a variety 
of sources and to converge the data to illuminate the case.  
 

557  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
References 
Baxter, P. (2000). An exploration of student decision making as experienced by second 
year baccalaureate nursing students in a surgical clinical setting.  Unpublished 
master’s thesis, McMaster University, Hamilton, ON. 
Baxter, P. (2003).  The development of nurse decision maki ng: A case study of a four year 
baccalaureate nursing programme . Unpublished doctoral thesis, McMaster 
University, Hamilton, ON. 
Baxter, P., & Rideout, L. (2006). Decision ma king of 2nd year baccalaureate nursing 
students. Journal of Nursing Education , 45(4), 121-128. 
Campbell, R., & Ahrens, C. E. (1998). Innovati ve community services for rape victims: 
An application of multiple case study methodology. American Journal of 
Community Psychology , 26, 537-571. 
Creswell, J. (1998). Research design: Qualitative,  quantitative, and mixed methods 
approaches  (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Forchuk, C., & Roberts, J. (1993). How to critique qualitative research articles. Canadian 
Journal of Nursing Research , 25, 47-55.  
Guba, E. (1981). Criteria for assessing the trustworthiness of na turalistic inquiries. 
Educational Resources Informati on Center Annual Review Paper , 29, 75-91.  
Hancock, D. R., & Algozzine, B. (2006).  Doing case study research: A practical guide 
for beginning researchers.  New York: Teachers College Press. 
Handel, N., Silverstein, M., Waisman, E., Waisman, J., & Gierson, E. (1990). Reasons 
why mastectomy patients do not have breast reconstruction. Plastic 
Reconstruction Surgery , 86(6), 1118-22. 
Hellström, I., Nolan, M., & Lundh, U. (2005). “We do things together.” A case study of 
“couplehood” in dementia. Dementia , 4(1), 7-22. 
Joia, L. A. (2002). Analysing a web-base d e-commerce learning community: A case 
study in Brazil. Internet Research , 12, 305-317. 
Knafl, K., & Breitmayer, B. J. (1989). Trian gulation in qualitative research: Issues of 
conceptual clarity and purpose. In J. Morse (Ed.), Qualitative nursing research: A 
contemporary dialogue (pp. 193-203). Rockville, MD: Aspen. 
Krefting, L. (1991). Rigor in qualitative res earch: The assessment of  trustworthiness. 
American Journal of Occupational Therapy , 45, 214-222. 
Lather, P. (1992). Critical frames in educat ional research: Feminist and post-structural 
perspectives.  Theory into Practice , 31(2), 87-99.  
Lincoln, Y. S., & Guba, E. A. (1985).  Naturalistic inquiry . Beverly Hills, CA: Sage. 
Lotzkar, M., & Bottorff, J. (2001). An obser vational study of the development of a nurse-
patient relationship. Clinical Nursing Research , 10, 275-294. 
Luck, L., Jackson, D., & Usher, K. ( 2007). STAMP: Components of observable 
behaviour that indicate pot ential for patient violence in emergency departments. 
Journal of Advanced Nursing , 59, 11-19. 
Mays, N., & Pope, C. (2000). Qualitative rese arch in health care: Assessing quality in 
qualitative research. BMJ , 320, 50-52.  
Miles, M. B., & Huberman, A. M. (1994). Qualitative data analys is: An expanded source 
book  (2nd ed.). Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 

Pamela Baxter and Susan Jack  558 
Morrow, M., Scott, S., Menck, H., Mustoe , T., & Winchester, D. (2001). Factors 
influencing the use of breast reconstr uction postmastectomy: A national cancer 
database study . Journal of American  College of Surgeons,  192(1), 69-70. 
Patton, M. (1990). Qualitative evaluation and research methods  (2nd ed.). Newbury 
Park, CA: Sage. 
Polednak, A. (2000). Geographic variation in postmastectomy breast r econstruction rates. 
Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery , 106(2), 298-301. 
Reaby, L. (1998). Reasons why women who have  mastectomy decide to have or not to 
have breast reconstruction. Plastic & Reconstructive Surgery, 101 (7), 1810-1818,  
Richards, L., & Richards, T. (1994). From fili ng cabinet to computer. In A. Bryman & R. 
G. Burgess (Eds.), Analysing qualitative data (pp. 146-172). London: Routledge. 
Richards, T. J., & Richards, L.  (1998). Using comput ers in qualitative research. In N. K. 
Denzin & Y. S. Lincoln (Eds.), Collecting and interpretin g qualitative materials 
(pp. 445-462). London: Sage.  
Russell, C., Gregory, D., Ploeg, J., DiCens o, A., & Guyatt, G. (2005). Qualitative 
research. In A. DiCenso, G. Guyatt, & D. Ciliska (Eds.), Evidence-based nursing: 
A guide to clinical practice  (pp. 120-135). St. Louis, MO: Elsevier Mosby. 
Sandelowski, M. (1986). The problem of rigor in qualitative research. Advances in 
Nursing Science , 8(3), 27-37. 
Sandelowski, M. (1993). Rigor or rigor mor tis: The problem of rigor in qualitative 
research revisited.  Advances in Nursing Science,  16(1), 1-8. 
Scanlon, C. (2000). A professional code of ethics provides guidance for genetic nursing 
practice. Nursing Ethics , 7(3), 262-268. 
Scheib, J. W. (2003). Role st ress in the professional life of  the school music teacher: A 
collective case study. Journal of Research in Music Education , 51,124-136. 
Stake, R. E. (1995). The art of case study research . Thousand Oaks, CA: Sage. 
Staradub, V., YiChing Hsieh, M., Clauson, J., et al. (2002). Factors that influence 
surgical choices in women with breast carcinoma. Cancer,  95(6), 1185-1190. 
Tolson, D., Fleming, V., & Schartau, E.  (2002). Coping with menstruation: 
Understanding the needs of women with Parkinson’s disease. Journal of 
Advanced Nursing , 40, 513-521. 
Wallace, M., Wallace, H., Lee, J., & Dobke, M. (1996). Pain after breast surgery: A 
survey of 282 women. Pain, 66 (2-3), 195-205. 
Wanzel, K., Brown, M., Anastakis, D., et al. (2002). Reconstruc tive breast surgery: 
Referring physician knowledge and learning needs. Plastic and Reconstructive 
Surgery,  110(6), xx-xx. 
Wickham, M., & Woods, M. (2005). Refl ecting on the strategic use of CAQDAS to 
manage and report on the qualitative research process. The Qualitative Report,  
10(4), 687-702. 
Yin, R. K. (2003). Case study research: Design and methods  (3rd ed.). Thousand Oaks, 
CA: Sage. 
 

559  The Qualitative Report  December 2008  
 
 
Author Note 
 
Dr. Pamela Baxter is an assistant prof essor at McMaster University. Contact 
information: McMaster University, 1200 Ma in St. W., HSB- 3N28C, Hamilton, ON, L8N 
3Z5; Phone: 905-525-9140 x 22290; Fax: 905-52 1-8834; E-mail: baxterp@mcmaster.ca 
Dr. Susan Jack is an assistant professo r at McMaster University. 1200 Main St. 
W. Hamilton, ON L8N 3Z5; E-mail: jacksm@mcmaster.ca  
 Copyright 2008: Pamela Baxter, Susan J ack, and Nova Southeastern University 
 
Article Citation 
 
Baxter, P., & Jack, S. (2008). Qualita tive case study methodology: Study design and 
implementation for novice researchers. The Qualitative Report , 13(4), 544-559. 
Retrieved from http://www.nova .edu/ssss/QR/QR13-4/baxter.pdf 
 
 

