Annex 4: Maintenance Procedure for Q3C, Q3D, and M7  
This Maintenance Procedure applies to revision of the Q3C Guideline for Residual Solvents, Q3D 
Guideline for Elemental Impurities, and M7 Addendum for the Assessment and Control of DNA 
Reactive (mutagenic) Impurities in Pharmaceuticals to Limit Potential C arcinogenic Risk. The 
procedure explains the process for revising the existing Guidelines as new solvents, metals or 
impurities are accepted or as new data becomes available. These changes include the following 
revisions for each Guideline:  
• Q3C – Incorpor ation of Permitted Daily Exposure (PDE) for new solvents and revising the PDE 
for solvents already listed in Q3C as new toxicological data for solvents becomes available.  
• Q3D - Incorporation of Permitted Daily Exposure (PDE) for new elemental impurities/ro utes 
of administration and revising the PDE for elemental impurities already listed in Q3D as new 
toxicological data for elemental impurities becomes available.  
• M7 Addendum – Incorporation of acceptable limits (Acceptable Intakes (AIs) or PDEs) for new 
DNA reactive (mutagenic) impurities and revising acceptable limits for impurities already 
listed in the Addendum as new data becomes available.  
Data and/or proposals pertaining to the revision of the Q3C, Q3D, or M7 Guidelines with supporting 
information can be submitted directly to the ICH Secretariat from either an ICH Member or Observer 
or other interested ICH stakeholders.   
Information provided within a proposal should be based on significant toxicity data from studies such 
as repeat -dose studies, reprodu ctive toxicity studies, genotoxicity studies, and carcinogenicity studies 
and/or other relevant studies. Single -dose toxicity data alone are not sufficient. The toxicity data 
should be of sufficient quality to calculate a PDE or AI.  Genotoxicity and carci nogenicity data are of 
primary importance for revisions to the M7 Guideline.  
An Expert Working Group (EWG) will evaluate any proposals received. The membership of an EWG 
will generally not change however, the same procedure applies for establishment of an  EWG/IWG as 
outlined in section 1. 4.1 – EWG/IWG Membership  of this SOP. As appropriate, an ICH Observer 
may submit a request to the Assembly to nominate an Observer expert to the EWG.  
The Rapporteur should be a Fou nding Regulatory Member and will serve a two -year term.  The role of 
the Rapporteur for each working group will rotate every two years to a new Founding Regulatory 
Member.  The ICH Assembly will be notified following each rotation of the Rapporteur.  Propo sals will 
be evaluated once every 2 years following rotation of the Rapporteur. The ICH Secretariat will share 
any proposals received with the new Rapporteur and ICH Coordinators. The Rapporteur will facilitate 
the review of any proposals received by the E WG and the EWG will make a recommendation on 
whether the proposal should be supported by the Management Committee (MC).  
If a proposal for maintenance is supported by an EWG, the EWG should submit a revised work plan to 
the MC to outline this work. The MC will then provide a recommendation to the Assembly for approval 
on whether the EWG should be tasked with making the revision.  

A revision will be considered only on presentation of new data or previously un -recognised toxicity 
data sufficient to result in a significant change, or because of convincing evidence that the existing 
data used to calculate a PDE are invalid. Minor changes in a PDE will not be considered. The Regulatory 
Chair (or in the absence of a Regulatory Chair, the Rapporteur) with the conse nsus of the EWG 
members, will assign data reviews to the EWG and request subsequent recommendations.  
The Rapporteur will ordinarily rely on correspondence or teleconferencing to avoid unnecessary 
travel. Based on the discussion, with requests for further information to the proposing group and/or 
individual as appropriate, the Rapporteur will prepare an assessment report based on the EWG’s 
approval with a recommendation to accept, with or without modifications, or reject any proposed 
revisions.   
After endo rsement by the Assembly, either at the next formal meeting or by electronic endorsement, 
the recommendation of the EWG will be published in each region for public comment ( Step 3 of the 
ICH process). In addition, the proposal will be provided to each pharm acopoeia for their publication.  
To ensure clarity on the matter for public comment, only a document listing any changes to the core 
guideline and/or any new addendums (e.g., with new PDEs) should be published.   
After closure of the public comment period, t he Regulatory Chair (or in the absence of a Regulatory 
Chair, the Rapporteur) may convene a meeting of the EWG or will rely on correspondence or 
teleconferencing to consider the comments and finalise the proposal for the revised Guideline. The 
final recomm endation for the Guideline and implementation is then forwarded to the Assembly for 
adoption in consultation with the MC. Implementation will follow regional practices. With approval of 
the ICH Assembly, the change will be provided to the pharmacopoeias at  regional/national level for 
publication.  
When a new or revised PDE or AI is recommended by the EWG, approval by the ICH MC is required. 
Once approval occurs, the information should be disseminated as quickly as possible to all ICH 
participants and other members of the chemical and pharmaceutical communities. It is recommended 
that the following actions should be taken by the MC to ensure rapid transmission of the new 
information:  
• Publish relevant information on the ICH website;  
• Request publication of re visions by the pharmacopoeias of the ICH regions in their Forums or 
websites;  
• Request that each member publish the new or revised PDE or AI information on its respective 
websites.  
 

