JOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
MEDIA 
INFORMATION 
2022
www.journalforclinicalstudies.com
1 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UOUR BRAND
Our contribution to the
Industry
The Pharmaceutical Industries' vision to bring a cure 
for all, the need to bring medicines to market faster, 
and the intention to make healthcare available to all 
has seen trials being conducted in many locations. 
The access to patients with a varied gene pool, food 
and cultural habits and population exposed to specific 
diseases has seen regions like India, China, Africa, 
Middle East and Latin America become major sites for 
sponsor companies to conduct their clinical trials. As 
with all global operations, operating under different 
regulatory guidelines, understanding different cultural 
and ethical values and finding the right partners, 
has remained a challenge for pharmaceutical, bio- 
pharmaceutical and medical device companies. JCS 
with its distinguished editorial advisory board provides 
you with the best practice guidelines for conducting 
global clinical trials. We are the specialist journal 
providing you with relevant articles which will help 
you to navigate emerging markets.
Our Focus
Our authors – who share their knowledge and offer 
practical experiences with our readers – are executives, 
managers, and investigators who are involved in 
every stage of clinical trials from study design and 
protocol development, to data management, subject 
recruitment, budget negotiations, and site monitoring.
Our Readers
With a global audience of 41,500 * engaged clinical 
professionals, Journal for Clinical Studies connects you 
to the industry professionals who are most receptive to 
your marketing message.
11.6%
18.9%
15.2%
54.3%
Key Decision Makers                            Recommend and Influence Purchasing
Make Decision as Groups                    Not Involved in Purchasing Decision

2 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UOUR EXPERTS
Deborah  
A. Komlos
Deborah A. Komlos, MS, is the US 
correspondent for Journal for Clinical 
Studies. Deborah is the Senior Medical & Regulatory Writer 
for the Cortellis Regulatory Intelligence US module at 
Clarivate Analytics. In this role, her coverage centres on 
FDA advisory committee meetings, workshops, and product 
approvals. Deborah’s columns and blogs are always timely, 
interesting and invaluable for clinical trial professionals. 
Dr. Hermann 
Schulz
Dr. Hermann Schulz, is the Europe 
correspondent for Journal for Clinical 
Studies. Dr Schulz holds an MD (Barcelona and Munich) 
as well as an MBA in Business Administration (Zurich). 
Dr. Hermann Schulzm is a Visiting Professor, Clinical 
Pharmacology and Pharmaceutical Medicine, Universities 
of Duisburg/Essen and Witten-Herdecke and also the 
Founding Member of the International Association of 
Central Laboratories IACL, London. With his extensive 
knowledge of the Clinical Trials arena, Dr Schulz advises 
and contributes thought leadership articles within JCS. 
Lucy 
Robertshaw
Lucy Robertshaw is a contributor and 
member of the Editorial Advisory Board 
for Journal for Clinical Studies. Lucy has many years 
of experience of working with AstraZeneca, Lucy is a 
member of the American Women’s Club in Stockholm, 
where she loves to meet likeminded people and enjoy her 
passion for networking. Through this networking Lucy 
provides insights and interviews from clinical trials experts,  
reporting from conferences and events, and analyses the 
current clinical trials market.
Journal for Clinical 
Studies’ Editorial 
Advisory Board
Our Editorial Advisory Board ensures the 
credibility and accuracy of our content through 
their expertise. The Board members come from all 
walks of the industry – CROs, Regulatory agencies, 
Ministry of Health, Technology and Pharmaceutical 
Companies. They have experience with Clinical 
Trials Management, Design, GCP, Recruitment & 
Retention, Data management, Informed consent 
and other fields. These international experts offer 
their mastery to review manuscripts, suggest 
topics and advise editors on industry issues. 
Through their contributions, our readers benefit by 
receiving credible, practical and relevant articles 
and commentaries. 

3 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
CIRCULATION & READERSHIP
In Print
JCS is a globally distributed publication with an 
established presence across the world. Each Bi-
monthly issue has a print copy distribution figure 
of 24,200  copies, and digital distribution figure of 
17,345 , providing strong access to the International 
Market. JCS is sent directly to key decision makers 
in the Clinical Research Industry.
In Digital
JCS – Journal for Clinical Studies E Newsletter 
– provides the latest business news, product news, 
events, technical papers, and links to company 
information and services. This gives you the regular 
and latest update on products and services offered 
to the global clinical trials industry.
JCS  eCampaigns  – is sent to more than 17,345   
professionals working for the leading pharma-
ceutical companies, midsized bio technology 
companies, clinical research organisations, other 
vendors & service providers, and government & 
non-government agencies.Corporate Management (Medical Directors / Medical 
Affairs)
Research and Development (Project Management)
Heads of Clinical Trials
Heads of IT (Date Management / Analysis / 
Biostatistics)
Heads of Lifesciences
Logistics and Supply Chain Managers
Regulatory Affairs / Compliance / Drug Safety / 
Pharmacovigilance
Clinical research Coordinator (CRC / Study 
Coordinator / Research Nurse)
Clinical Research Associate (CRA Monitor)
GCP Auditing / OC / QA
Laboratory Analysis
Contracting / Procurement Officers
AMERICA + CANADA        Print:  8,442 Digital:  6,282
EUROPE + RUSSIA    Print:  8,474 Digital:  7,395
ASIA    Print:  3,969 Digital:  3,590
REST OF THE WORLD  Print:  3,387 Digital:  1,350Print Subscribers
Digital Subscribers
JCS eNewsletters
e Blast READERSHIP BY JOB FUNCTIONBUSINESS & INDUSTRIES
CIRCULATION14%
14%
12%
10%
7%
7%
7%
6%
6%
6%
6%
5%
24,200
17,345
16,34217,345
DIRECT MAILPharmaceuticals/ BioPharmaceutical  
Biologics Company
Contract Research Organisation
Government
Drug Development, Clinical Trials,  
Consulting Company
Clinical Study / Investigative Site
Clinical Laboratory
Trial/Site Management Organisation
Independent CRA
Data Management
Other63%15%
7%
3%
2%2%<1%3%7%
4 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
RATES & DATA
Print Media Digital Media
PRINT ADVERTISEMENT WEBSITE ADVERTISEMENT
£ 5,250
£ 2,850
£ 1,650
£ 5,950
£ 4,850
£ 7,250
£ 3,750
£ 3,750
£ 2,000
£ 1,500£2,500 for 3 mos
£1,800 for 3 mos
£1,200 for 3 mos
£1,000 per 3 mos
£1,000 per 3 mos
£1,000 for 3 mos
£1,000 per 3 mos
£250 for 3 mos
£250 for 3 mos
Double Page
Full Page
Half Page (Vertical / Horizontal)
Prime Positions:
Inside Front Cover
Inside Back Cover
Outside Back Cover
Page Opposite Contents
Page Opposite Editor’s Letter
1 Page Corporate Profile
Front Cover LOGOHome Page Pop-up  640 x 480 px
Corner Peel (Specs sent upon request)
Leader Board 728 x 90 px
Rectangular (right/left column) 300 x 250 px
Skyscraper (right/left column) 300 x 600 px
Host Videos
Sponsored Articles
Events Listing
News
Discounts apply for series bookings.
Inserts, reprints and recruitment advertisers’ rates are
available on application.
For more information contact: sales@pharmapubs.com
MECHANICAL SPECIFICATIONS
(In mm, Height x Width, with Type, Trim, Bleed)
                 Type    Trim        Bleed
Full Page:                               261 x 181        297 x 210        303 x 216
 
½ Pages (horizontal)            135 x 186         148 x 210         154 x 216
½ Pages (vertical)                 273 x 92          297 x 105       303 x 108
Please supply digitally, ideally a press ready PDF.
Alternatively supply as a flat image file  (Tiff, Jpeg, EPS, PSD 
etc) ensuring that all fonts are embedded , images are High-
resolution  and the file is CMYK .E Newsletter
E Blast: HTML E Blast£250 Per Week
(Minimum of 4 weeks booking)
£1,470 Per CampaignE-Blast & E-Newsletter 
Campaign
JCS holds a secured database of over 17,345  
professionals working for the leading pharma-
ceutical, midsized bio-technology companies, 
CRO's and other stakeholders, who have given 
their consent to receive a Weekly Electronic 
Newsletter and any 3rd party relevant supplier 
information. JCS provides a direct communication 
link to these high net worth individuals through 
its Electronic Campaign Platforms.

5 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
CONTENT PROGRAMS
Dedicated Dialogue
Journal for Clinical Studies will conduct an interview 
with an expert from your company (executive, 
corporate manager etc). This interview will be marketed 
through the following channels:  Featured as a 2 Page 
Interview in the JCS Journal,  The interview will be 
hosted on the www.journalforclinicalstudies.com 
website, and will also be promoted through the JCS 
E-Newsletter. We will give you a designed PDF of the 
interview which you can either host on your website, 
or share on your social media platforms. 
Talking Point
A member of JCS’s team will attend your company’s 
conference presentation and conduct an in-person 
interview with your presenter. The Q & A will be 
published as a 2–3-page interview in a print/digital 
issue of Journal for Clinical Studies, and shared 
through our E Newsletter, and social media channels. Sponsored eBook
A sponsored custom eBook or eBook series on topic(s) of your choice or a 
collaborative topic in conjunction with Journal for Clinical Studies editorial 
team. This program is designed to deliver high quality leads. 
✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Lead Generation, Thought Leadership
✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Thought Leadership✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Thought Leadership
Cost: £2,500
Cost: £7,850
Cost: £2,000 + travel

6 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UDIGITAL OFFERINGS
Online Website 
Advertising
Display your ad in front of decision makers in the 
field by placing your banner advertisement on www.
journalforclinicalstudies.com. 
MLM Medical Labs GmbH  
 
MLM Medical Labs (MLM)  is a Central Laboratory dedicated exclusively to clinical trials. MLM offers 
full laboratory services, including a whole range of analytics: standard safety profiles, such as blood 
counts, coagulation, urinalysis and clinical chemistry, and analyses of bio markers, drug compounds, 
metabolites and molecular diagnostic parameters. Internationally active for 25 years in over 40 
countries MLM is located in Monchengladbach , Germany. The MLM lab is on duty 365 days a year to 
ensure valid results with a quick turna round time. Highly skilled with extensive clinical lab 
experience, our 60 -person team supports over 140 clinical studies, phase I -IV at any given time.  
MLM Medical Labs runs trials in a broad range of indications, including diabetes, cancer, infectious 
diseases, dermatology, and diseases affecting the cardiovascular, neurological and immunological 
system.  
 
All members of the technical staff are certified research or medical assistants. 50% of the team has 
degrees in chemistry, biochemistry, biology or physio logy and a third have completed PhDs in 
relevant fields.  
 
MLM’s customers are renowned CROs and companies in the biotech and pharmaceutical industries 
in Europe, Asia and the U.S. To fully support this worldwide client base, we’ve developed an 
outstanding l evel of flexibility and dedicated ourselves to high -quality results delivered promptly.  
In 2015 MLM forged a strategic alliance with Cenetron Central Laboratories, located in Austin Texas, 
USA in order to offer seamless laboratory testing for European and North American client sites.  
  
Analytics  
› Development and validation of analytical methods  
› Broad portfolio of validated biomarker assays  
› World -standard analytical methods  
› Clinical chemistry, haematology , coagulation, serology and urine analysis  
› Com plete analytical study reports  
 Management and Logistics  
› Global study setup and project management  
› In-house manufacturing of study -specific sampling kits: MLM Kit Building®  
› More than 2700 sqm lab space  
› Worldwide transport of clinical samples, samp ling kits and supplies  
› Long term sample storage at -30 °C,  -80 °C and cry conservation: MLM Smart Storage System®  
 Superior IT infrastructure  
› Online data -access and kit tracking: mlm online® 
› MLM  Smart Storage System® for safe and stable long term storage on a daily costs basis  
› Electronic data transfer according to client’s DTA specification 
Website:   www.mlm -labs.com 
Corporate Profile 
Listing
Exclusive resource section on the Journal For Clinical 
Studies (journalforclinicalstudies.com) website where 
your company can disseminate collateral, videos, 900 
word company descriptions, USP to drive website 
traffic, generate leads and more. Your content block 
is not an ad unit and does not go into rotation so it is 
visible 24/7.✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Web Traffic
✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Web Traffic
Ad Retargeting
Once a visitor leaves  jforcs.com, your display ad will 
follow them across the web, driving targeted groups 
to your website to learn more about your products or 
services.
✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Web Traffic
7 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UDIGITAL OFFERINGS
BOOST – Custom 
Targeted Email Campaign
BOOST is a highly targeted, data driven, HTML E-  
Campaign tool. BOOST contains over 100,000 decision  
makers from global companies involved in the  
pharmaceutical and scientific industries served  
by our leading publications. 
Journal for Clinical 
Studies – E-Newsletter  
JCS – E-Newsletter  is published weekly to over 17,345  
highly engaged clinical trials professionals. Each edition  
features a premium collection of news, blogs, advertising 
banners, events, webcasts and more.  
JCS Newsletter  also contains highlighted articles from 
the most current edition of the journal.
✓ Content Tactic: Web Traffic, Lead Generation
✓ Content Tactic: Branding/Awareness, Web Traffic
JOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
BOOST
8 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UDIGITAL MEDIA INFORMATION
journalforclinicalstudies.com
Average E Blast CTR: 2.8
Average E Newsletter CTR: 3.2
journalforclinicalstudies.com is an online portal 
providing readers with peer-reviewed articles from 
industry experts, news bulletins, a company directory 
and technical white papers. Website visitors are also  
able to access the entire archive of JCS articles.
The location report from Google analytics (2021)  
reveals that over 92% of visits came from Europe, 
America, Asia and Middle East. The leading countries 
are United States, United Kingdom, Germany, France, 
Norway, Switzerland, Italy, China, India, UAE, Saudi 
Arabia and Australia.White Papers
journalforclinicalstudies.com  presents technical white 
papers, high-lighting each contributing organisation's 
expertise and knowledge within its fields. White papers 
appear on the site in an accessible, searchable archive, 
which can be easily viewed and downloaded by readers.
Digital Journal and eNewsletter
The digital magazine edition of JCS is a fully interactive, 
page turning version of the print magazine. The e-Journal 
is emailed to a growing list of digital subscribers in a 
regular newsletter, expanding JCS's print circulation to 
a broad international readership.
Company Capabilities
journalforclinicalstudies.com's  online company profile 
listings provides a guide for readers wishing to find out 
more about service providers. The company listings 
features company contact information, along with an 
800 word description, company logo and website links.
Total amount of Impressions in 2021:
   18,327,628
Total amount of clicks in 2021:
   57,829
Total amount of unique Impressions in 2021:
   16,142,238
Total amount of unique clicks in 2021:  
   47,231
Social Media
www.twitter.com/journalforclinicalstudies
www.facebook.com/journalforclinicalstudies

9 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES UEDITORIAL CALENDAR 2022
JCS – Journal for Clinical Studies  is peer reviewed. 
Supported by a team of industry experts, JCS brings 
you contemporary and authoritative articles which will 
guide the industry to use the best practice for  regulatory 
issues, market analysis, drug discovery, development, 
drug design, clinical research, data analysis, safety 
and efficacy, recruitment and retention, laboratories, 
analytical testing, custom and contract manufacturing, 
primary and secondary packaging and logistics and 
supply chain management.
This Editorial Calendar is a Guideline only. It is 
subject to change according to movements in the 
industry. If you are interested in featuring a specific 
article within JCS, please email your suggestion 
along with a short 100 word synopsis to the editor at:  
editorial@senglobalcoms.com.
Peer Review Protocol
Criteria for Publication
Provides strong evidence for its conclusions. • Novel • 
Unbiased • Non Promotional. Of extreme importance 
to stakeholders in the Pharmaceutical Industry. In 
general, to be acceptable, a paper should represent an 
advance in understanding that is likely to influence 
thinking in the field. There should be a good and clear 
reason as to why the work deserves the visibility of 
publication in a Pharma Publications journal rather 
than a different journal.
Author Guidelines
A typical article will be about 2000–2500 words. You 
can include from 4–5 images, graphs or graphics within 
the article. 
The article must be sent to us in a Word Document 
format, and all associate images should be supplied 
separately in a High Resolution (PDF, Jpeg, PNG) file. 
[300 dpi min].
Editorial Sections
include but are not limited to:
Watch Pages
Market Report
Clinical & Medical Research
Clinical Trials Supply
Central Labs & Core Labs
Laboratories
Data Management
Regulatory Guidelines
Therapeutics
Analytical Testing
Manufacturing & Packaging
Recruitment & Retention
Innovations
Investment & Finance
Article Title:  Should not be more than 10 words in length.
Author Bios:  Author Bios should not be more than 60 
words in length. Please also supply us with the Author (s)  
Email.
Author Picture(s):  Please send Author(s) Headshots in 
High Resolution (300 dpi min), (Jpeg, PDF format)
Please visit our website  journalforclinicalstudies , or 
request from our editorial team the entire Peer Review 
Protocol, and the Author Guidelines.
10 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
Market Reports
•  Country Focus:  UK, EU, Scandinavia
•  Globalising clinical trials
•  The promise of a reporting system in patient safety
•  Emerging role of bioinformatics tools in the evolution of 
clinical research
•  Medical writing
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Medical device & trials
•  Increasing the industries sustainability by using patient 
inspired solutions
•  Artificial intelligence in clinical & medical research
•  Late phase trials
Therapeutics
•  CNS
•  Focus on: Schizophrenia / Depression
•  Reproductive & maternal health
•  Pediatric
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Comparator drug supply
• Named patient programmes
• Assessing of study design and matching to systems based 
on efficiency & cost
Technology
•  E-clinical technologies
•  Translation services
•  IVRS/IWRS
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  Sample management
•  Sourcing and procurement
•  Optimisation and cost managementMarket Reports
•  Country Focus: Australia & New Zealand, India, China
•  Risk based monitoring
•  FSP versus full service
•  Clinical trials insurance
•  Global outsourcing and vendor management
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Guiding the clinical trials industry in Digital Health
•  Strategic alignment of study objectives and endpoints to 
drive value and fill data gaps
•  The increasing inclusion of biomarkers as an eligible 
criterion for participation in clinical trials.
•  Responsibilities of the sponsor and the monitor
Therapeutics
•  Paediatrics
•  Oncology in paediatrics
•  Obesity
•  Respiratory (COPD)
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Randomization and blinding
• Handling of and accountability for pharmaceutical 
products for trial
• Termination of trial – Returns & destruction
Technology
•  Monitoring, auditing and inspection
•  Record-keeping and handling of data
•  Information for subjects and informed consent
•  Adverse event reporting
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  Temperature controlled shipment
•  Multinational logistics service networks
•  Instruction for compliant submissions offered in US & 
EuropeEDITORIAL CALENDAR 2022
January     Volume 14 Issue 1 March          Volume 14 Issue 2
Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:25th January 2022
10th December 202125th March 2022
10th February 2022
11 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
Market Reports
•  Country Focus:  Singapore, Japan, Thailand, China,  
South Korea, Malaysia
•  Site selection
•  Pharmacovigilance & risk management
•  Clinical trials reimbursement
•  Training and capacity building
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Guiding the clinical trials industry in digital health – 
dissecting digital health data collection methodologies
•  Strategic alignment of study objectives and endpoints to 
drive value and fill data gaps
•  The increasing inclusion of biomarkers as an eligible 
criterion for participation in clinical trials
•  Assessing complexity of study design and matching to 
systems based on efficiency and cost-effectiveness
Therapeutics
•  CNS Disease – Focus on: Alzheimer's / Dementia
•  Cardiovascular 
•  Obesity & metabolic
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Clinical trials packaging & labelling
•  Multi-tenant cloud platform to manage, track and report  
clinical trial activities
•  Improvements through ERP
Technology
•  Big data and AI initiatives changing the competitive 
landscape
•  The 'beyond the pill' model: apps and wearable devices
•  The electronic laboratory notebooks: addressing data  
security and privacy concerns
•  Using advanced analytics and language processing 
capabilities to deliver clinical decision support
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  Clinical trials logistics
•  The security of patient data in digital supply chains
•  RFID and NFC tags the blockchain promise
•  Cardiovascular safetyMarket Reports
•  Country Focus: USA, Canada, Latin America
•  Imaging Labs / Central Labs / ECG & Core Labs
•  Late stage research (II–IV)
•  Patient recruitment & retention
•  Medical writing
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Patient centricity in support of clinical operations and 
study adherence
•  The importance of subject recruitment and retention to 
clinical trial success
•  Unique challenges and opportunities in orphan diseases
•  Outsourcing and collaborative research in clinical trials
Therapeutics
•  Food borne
•  Bacterial & mycotic
•  Ophthalmology
•  Diabetes
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Clinical trials packaging & labelling
• Multi-tenant cloud platform to mange, track and report 
clinical trial activities
• Improvements through ERP
Technology
•  EDC – Data Capture & Evaluation
•  The rise of virtual drug design tools
•  Virtual screening and database building
•  Scientific apps in the labs
•  The 3D printed pill technology
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  Building a patient-centric supply chain
•  Integrating cybersecurity solutions
•  Supply chain meets blockchain innovation
•  Temperature control – innovative solutions
•  Advancements in GPS tracking options GDP 
requirements: the understanding and application of 
Quality Risk Management (QRM)May                Volume 14 Issue 3 July               Volume 14 Issue 4
Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:25th May 2022
10th April 202225th July 2022
10th June 2022EDITORIAL CALENDAR 2022
12 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
Market Reports
•  Country Focus:  Sub Saharan Africa, South Africa,
 Middle East & North Africa
•  Early phase (I & II)
•  Remote data acquisition & analysis
•  Medical writing
•  Translation services
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Application challenges of the new EU Clinical Trial 
Regulation
•  Early phase trials
•  Future perspectives and innovations in clinical studies
•  FDA Post-marketing safety surveillance program for drug 
and therapeutic biologic products
Therapeutics
•  Rare disease
•  Infectious diseases
•  Oncology
•  Vaccine development
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Comparator drug supply
• Named patient programmes
• Assessing of study design and matching to systems based 
on efficiency & cost.
Technology
•  ePRO, BOYD, eCOA, eCTD
•  CDISC / CDASH
•  Data management & biometrics
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  New approaches in pharma logistics
•  Securing the Pharma Supply chain: the current challenges
•  Sourcing and procurement
•  Optimisation and cost management
•  Logistics control in extreme weather conditionsMarket Reports
•  Country Focus: Russia, CEE States, CIS States, Central 
Europe
•  The new EU clinical trials regulations
•  Use of Investigative sites in Central & Eastern Europe.
•  RIB & Ethics review board
•  Risk based monitoring
•  Training and education
Clinical & Medical Research
•  Evaluating needs and available in-house resources for 
managing data and regulatory documentation
•  Pharmacogenomics & personalised medicine
•  Biomarkers & biosimilars
•  Study oversight models and quality / risk management 
systems
Therapeutics
•  Rare disease
•  Infectious diseases
•  Oncology
•  Vaccine development
Clinical Trials Materials Management
• Building effective teams in the clinical trial schematic
• Supply and Storage
• Investigational labelling and packaging
Technology
•  EDC – Data capture & evaluation
•  The rise of virtual drug design tools
•  Virtual screening and database building
•  Scientific apps in the labs
Logistics & Supply Chain
•  Sample management
•  Sourcing and procurement
•  Optimisation and cost managementSeptember  Volume 14 Issue 5 November    Volume 14 Issue 6
Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:Issue Date:
Editorial Submission Deadline:25th September 2022
10th August 202225th November 2022
10th October 2022EDITORIAL CALENDAR 2022
13 
www.journalforclinicalstudies.comJOURNAL FO R
Your R esource f or Multisite Studies & Emer ging Mark etsCLINICAL STUDIES U
Contact:
Journal for Clinical Studies
46 Plover Way, London SE16 7TT, 
United Kingdom
T:   +44 (0) 204 5417569
E:  info@senglobalcoms.com
W:  journalforclinicalstudies.com
Advertising Contact:
Ty Eastman, ty@senglobalcoms.com
Editorial:
Beatriz Romao, beatriz@senglobalcoms.com
Subscriptions: 
Jessica Dean-Hill, jessica@senglobalcoms.com