Trusted evidence.Informed decisions.Better health.
Navigating the clinical study report (CSR): A road map to the data abstraction of CSRs for systematic reviewsFacilitators: Nicole Fusco, Roberta Scherer, Kay Dickersin

Purpose and Structure of this Workshop•Introduction to Clinical Study Reports (CSRs) and their use in systematic reviews (10 minutes)•Small group scavenger hunt using excerpts from CSRs (30 minutes)•Discussion of findings from scavenger hunt (30 minutes)•Lessons learned from our experiences (10 minutes)•Evaluation (10 minutes)2

What is a clinical study report (CSR)?“integrated full report of an individual study of any therapeutic, prophylactic or diagnostic agent (referred to herein as drug or treatment) conducted in patients, in which the clinical and statistical description, presentations, and analyses are integrated into a single report”1Example of a CSR: https://industrydocuments.library.ucsf.edu/drug/docs/#id=llgw021731. ICH 1995

What information is in a CSR?•Study design•Risk of bias•Analysis methods•Results for all outcomes•All adverse events•Case report forms•Individual patient data4

CSR Structure Example
5Section DescriptionNumber of PagesTitle page/Synopsis9Table of contents9List of abbreviations and definitions of terms2Ethics1Investigators and study administrative structure1Introduction1Study objectives, plan, and procedures43Study subjects10Efficacy results25Safety results48Discussion and overall conclusions6Tables, figures, and graphs referred to but not included in the text1458Appendix: Study information (e.g., Protocol, Case Report Forms, Statistical Analysis Plan, Publications based on study)2097Appendix: Subject data listings4316

Individual patient data in CSRs•Not always available•Can be extracted into usable format using optical character recognition software
6

IPD Example
7


Benefits of using CSRs in meta-analysis•Access to unpublished resultsØWhole outcomes (e.g., quality of life)ØSubgroups (e.g., sex, comorbid conditions)ØAdverse events•Standardization of analysis methodsØPopulation of analysisØMethods for handling missing data8

Challenges of using CSRs•Hard to obtain•Extremely longØOur 8 CSRs: average length 2917 pages, range 1315-8027•Contradicting information
9

Case example: Tamiflu2, 3•Meta-analysis in 2003 showed:ØReduced secondary complications and hospital admission•FDA had different conclusions:ØTamiflu did not reduce complications•Cochrane review of CSRs102. Jefferson 2012; 3. Doshi2012

Gains from using CSRs2, 3
11•Access to trials with delayed or no publication•Fine details of trial conduct•Subgroup analysis•Information about adverse events•Ability to assess of validity of other data sources2. Jefferson 2012; 3. Doshi2012

Questions?
12

References1.ICH E3. Structure and content of clinical study reports. London, UK: International Conference on Harmonisation; 1995.2.Jefferson T, Jones MA, DoshiP, et al. Neuraminidase inhibitors for preventing and treating influenza in healthy adults and children. Cochrane Database SystRev. 2012;1(1). 3.DoshiP, Jefferson T, Del Mar C. The imperative to share clinical study reports: recommendations from the Tamiflu experience. PLoSmedicine. 2012;9(4):e1001201.
13

Small groups•Form groups of 2-3•Each group will extract data from a CSR section•Each group will have different sections of the CSR•We will compare groups’ findings and discuss the benefits and challenges of using CSRs for systematic reviews14

Data Extraction Item 1What population(s) (e.g., intent-to-treat, all randomized, evaluable, etc.) will be used for the efficacy analyses and how are these populations defined?
15

Data Extraction Item 2Which outcomes are identified as "secondary” outcomes?
16

Data Extraction Item 3The primary outcome was change from baseline in the Montgomery-AsbergDepression Rating Scale (MADRS) at the end of the study (day 57). What data would you extract for meta-analysis of this outcome?17

Follow-up Discussion•What was difficult?•What was unexpected?
18

Lessons Learned•If the CSR is in PDF format, make sure the text is searchable•Utilize the “Add note to text” function 
19

Example
20

Lessons Learned•If the CSR is a PDF, make sure the text is searchable•Utilize the “Add note to text” function•Make a priori rules about which sections you will “trust” when there are discrepancies •Completely specify outcomeØComparing outcomes in CSRs with outcomes in other sources can help identify potential for reporting bias21

Wrap-Up•Remaining questions•Possible solutions to problems that arise
22

Thank you!
23

AcknowledgementsGillian GreshamEvan Mayo WilsonTianjing LiAs well as everyone from:Multiple Data Sources (MUDS) TeamCochrane United StatesJohns Hopkins Bloomberg School of Public HealthPatient Centered Outcome Research Institute (PCORI)24

