Publication Policy  
Document owner  Statistics department  Version number  1.0 
Effective date  2023 -01-03 Identifier  J-03-POL-01 
 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 1 of 11 
1 Purpose  
To define the EORTC policy regarding release and publication of all results from EORTC 
clinical studies and research projects.  
This policy covers timing of release of results, authorship and acknowledgements rules for 
abstracts/presentations and peer -reviewed publications , and the process of review by 
EORTC Headquarters.  
Compatible group-specific requirements or contractual agreements may complement the 
present policy when applicable.  
2 Scope  
The present policy applies to  any form of publication or public release of results of EORTC 
clinical studies or research projects , not including disclosure to regulatory authorities . 
Whenever EORTC participates to intergroup studies or research programs led by partner organisations, t he publication rules are prospectively agreed and documented, and must be 
compatible with the present p olicy.  
The development of EORTC Guidelines, expert opinions,  and the use of EORTC results in 
promotional material on cancer care are covered in a separat e EORTC p olicy ( “Developing 
EORTC Guidelines, Expert Opinions, and the use of EORTC Results in Promotional Material 
on Cancer Care” ). 
The release of individual patient data for external research is covered in the data sharing 
policy . 
3 Policy  statement  
The EORTC policy is to report results of all its research completely, accurately, objectively, 
and promptly , irrespective of the findings (positive or negative, statistically significant or not).  
The publications must conform to the most recent r elevant publication guidelines 
(CONSORT, CONSORT -PRO, STROBE, TRIPOD, etc., as appropriate; see www.equator -
network.org ) 
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 2 of 11 Authorship follows the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors  guidelines on 
authorship ( http://www.icmje.org/icmje -recommendations.pdf ). Contributors who do not fulfil 
the conditions  for authorship are acknowledged.  
Representatives from the for -profit industry do not generally  co-author publications of 
EORTC clinical studies.  
All publications that fall in the scope of the present policy must be reviewed and approved by 
EORTC Headquarter s prior to submission to journal or congress or presentation.  
The name “EORTC” must be clearly visible in the publications.  
4 Changes since last version  
Process step  Changes since last version  
All  Supersedes Publication policy POL009 v 5.0  
Added measures towards timely publication of results.  
Clarifications throughout the text.  
5 Disclosure and dissemination of results  
5.1 General rule  
The timing of analysis and disclosure of results must ensure that the following conditions are 
met before results are published.  
1. The information needed to conduct the analysis generating the results is complete 
and accurate. In particular, the duration of  follow- up in clinical studies must be 
sufficient to fulfil protocol requirements on analysis of study endpoints.  
2. An unbiased and clear interpretation of these results is possible, at the light of the 
disclosed or already available results.  
3. The disclosure of the results shall not jeopardize the future study conduct or cause 
bias in the future data collection regarding other research endpoints, if any.  
The timing of disclosure of the primary and major secondary endpoints of clinical studies is 
specified in the study  protocol. Typically, secondary efficacy endpoints are reported after 
reporting the primary efficacy endpoint.  Any deviation from the plan s pecified in the protocol , 
such as premature disclosure of all or part of the efficacy study endpoints on all or a subset 
of patients , requires authorization by the study IDMC.  
Directly ensuring from the above requirements:  
• Intermediate results of multiple- stage phase II or phase III studies would not be 
publicly disseminated.  
• Intermediate results of early phase studies (phase I, very early single arm phase II 
studies) may be published as soon as data completeness is guaranteed.  
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 3 of 11 • Results of translational res earch of randomized studies may not be disclosed prior to 
the disclosure of the study final results when they report correlations with the study 
endpoint in all treatment  arms . Likewise in single -arm studies, correlations with the 
study endpoint may not be disclosed.  
• Secondary efficacy endpoints are not disclosed before primary endpoints . 
• Interim reports regarding baseline information, treatment compliance and acute 
toxicity are authorized unless they are by themselves the study endpoints.  
• Reporting during the study  only on patient and baseline data accumulation to a study 
are authorized at any time.  
• For full -length publications of results from clinical studies , a definitive version of the 
locked database and a consolidated statistical analysis report must be available.  
5.2 Abstract publications of results  
For abstract -form publications, condition 1 (in 5.1) may be modified to the set of all following 
3 conditions:  
• Top line results (draft version of the data analysis report) are available.  
• The Headquarters study team has determined that inconsistencies and incomplete 
information in the database shall  not affect the conclusions presented in the abstract .  
• The database can be cleaned and locked in sufficient time to enable the preparation 
of the final data analysis report by the time of presentation.  
If abstracts are prepared based on  the modified conditions, the abstract must clearly stipulate 
that the results are not definitive and that definitive results shal l be presented.  
5.3 Press release  
All press releases about EORTC studies must be prepared by the EORTC communications 
department.  
If an external party undertakes to write such press releases about EORTC studies, it needs 
to be coordinated with and approved by the EORTC communications  depart ment 
(communication@eortc.org).  
Embargoes set by journals, congresses, or other media must be respected.   
5.4 Publications by individual sites pertaining to patients 
entered in E ORTC clinical studies 
Investigators shall not independently publish site -specific results about the study endpoints 
until results of the whole study are published ( or after one year following database lock if 
there is no publication). Deviations from this rule are authorized by the study IDMC.  Exceptions to this rule may be the publication of case reports when these are explicitly 
authorized in the study protocol.
 
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 4 of 11 When publishing information about patients entered in an EORTC clinical study, care is  
taken to avoid disclosing information that may affect the interpretation or the conduct of the 
clinical study. To this aim, the proposed publication shall  be submitted for review to EORTC  
headquarters  in accordance with the review timelines described under section 8.1 . 
The EORTC headquarters team in charge of the study must be informed of intended 
publications.  
6 Authorship and acknowledgements  
For any study or research project, authorship rules must be agreed prospe ctively and 
documented in the study protocol or in the research documentation.  
In particular,  the research leader (principal study coordinator(s) of clinical studies, 
coordinator of additional  research questions to clinical studies, and leader of research  
projects) must be clearly identified in the research protocol. The research leader directs  the 
writing of the corresponding publication.    
6.1 Responsibilities of first author  
The first author of the publication is responsible for  
• Identifying the co- authors of the publication agreeable to all parties involved in the 
research, in compliance with the present policy and further rules specified in the study 
protocol or research agreements. The headquarters  review coordinator check s 
compliance of the proposed author list with the present policy.  
For full length articles:  
• Drafting the manuscript within 6 months of receipt of the data analysis report 
produced by the EORTC headquarters, in collaboration with EORTC scientific staff 
involved in the research (statistician and medical representative for clinical studies, 
translat ional research or quality -of-life staff, or else as appropriate)  
• Delays in dissemination of results should be avoided. In case a first draft of 
the manuscript is not available within this timeline, the Group Chair in collaboration with the involved EORTC s cientific staff re -assigns  the first 
author responsibility. The research leader is  then given a place in the author 
list according to his/her contribution to the study and the applicable authorship 
rules.  
In case of a recurring delay, EORTC may assign the first author responsibility 
to an EORTC scientific staff member.  
• Selecting the journal to which the manuscript shall  be submitted, in agreement with 
co-authors , being aware that the E uropean Journal of C ancer  is the official journal of 
EORTC.  
• Submitting the manuscript for review by all co- authors and to the h eadquarters 
representatives. Ensuring that all authors have seen and approved the final 
manuscript before submission.  
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 5 of 11 • Collecting any signatures and disclosure forms requested by the journal . 
• Submitting the final manuscript of the article to a peer -reviewed journal as 
corresponding author . 
• Addressing all requests for revision by iterating the above steps until the manuscript 
is accepted for publication.  
• Reviewing the proofs of publication and answering any "letter to the editor" that the 
publication may have raised.  
For abstracts:  
• Drafting the abstract and circulating it to the co -authors and at least one EORTC 
headquarters representative (EORTC statistician for clinical studies and EORTC scien tific staff involved in the research). EORTC h eadquarter s circulates  the 
manuscript to all external partners of the research in accordance with  any contractual 
agreements . 
• Submitting the abstract onto the congress portal  
• Informing the Headquarters of the outcome of the submission and, if accepted,  the 
format of the presentation 
• Preparing the material for the presentation in collaboration with EORTC h eadquarter s  
• Presenting at the conference 
• Informing the EORTC headquarters of any planned press releases  
The contents of the publication must always be submitted to the EORTC h eadquarters 
for approval.
 
6.2 Authorship on full length articles  
EORTC follows the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors  guidelines on 
authorship.  All contributors who do not meet sufficient criteria for authorship are acknowledged in the publication.
 
The policy of EORTC is to recognize the scientific contribution of the largest possible number 
of contributors fulfilling the ICMJE guidelines through authorship on primary and/or 
secondary publications of its clinical studies and research project s, within the limits set by the 
journal to which the full -length article is submitted.  
The follow ing rules apply:  
6.2.1  Primary publication of clinical studies  
• The first author of publication of primary study results is the study coordinator who 
initiated the study design ( being the research leader in this case). Other study 
coordinators are usually second,  third or last author.  
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 6 of 11 • For intergroup studies, at least one authorship position is granted to each contributing 
group.  
• Authorship positions are granted to centres and groups contributing patients to the 
study on the basis of the number of patients contributing in the published research 
that they provided and are ordered by decreasing number. Authorship rules shall be 
speci fied upfront in the study protocol.  Rules may specify minimum number of 
patients required to qualify as co -author and may attribute additional positions to site s 
recruiting beyond a specified large number of the patients. Contributing groups and 
sites select themselves the names of the representatives that appear on the 
publication.  
• Scientific contributors to the trial such as but not limited to central pathologist, 
persons responsible for integral translational research components of the study (e.g. , 
molecular characterization, genomic analysis), central image reviewer, quality of life 
specialists also qualify as co- authors as long as the service they provided was not 
provided in the frame of a paid service agreement.  
• Representatives from the industry are generally not co -authors on publications of 
EORTC study results, except for scientists fulfilling one of the roles specified above. 
Deviations from this rule must be authorized by the EORTC Board.  
• Authorship is granted to t wo to three scientists at EORTC headquarters who 
contributed to the study (typically, study statistician, medical representative, other scientist involved in the study). This condition does not apply to intergroup studies not 
led by EORTC.  
6.2.2  Secondary publication of clinical studies  
• The rules listed for primary publications under 6.2.1 generally apply. However, the 
first authorship ( research leadership) may be delegated to another study contributor, 
in agreement with all parties involved in the study.  
• To maximize the number of investigators from contributing sites who are granted 
authorship, contributors fulfilling the ICMJE conditions who could not co -author the 
primary publication should preferentially be selected to co- author secondary 
publications. When the publication pertains to a long- term update of a clinical trial, the 
clinicians who provided the follow -up information generally replace the initial 
contributors as author.  
• Authorship is granted to t wo to three scientists at EORTC headquarters who 
contributed to the study . 
6.2.3  Publication of research not included in the clinical study 
protocol  
• The scientific leader of the research identified in the research protocol is the first 
author of the manuscript . 
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 7 of 11 • Authorship is attributed to all scientists who contributed to the research according to 
the ICMJE  guidelines.  
• Further authorship is granted to the site s who contributed data , samples , or 
information that enabled the research (e.g. , sites who contributed samples in a TR 
analysis, RT plans in an RTQA publi cation or HRQOL forms for an HRQOL 
publication)  
• Authorship is granted to scientists at EORTC headquarters who contributed to the 
analysis and publication, if any.  
6.3 Authorship on abstract publications  
Although the general rules listed in 6.2 apply , the tota l number of co- authors allowed on 
abstract submissions may be limited. If this is the case, the list determined in 6.1 shall be 
modified as follows  
• The study coordinator(s) retain authorship . 
• One author from the EORTC h eadquarter s is retained.  
• The other co -authors are selected from the list of co- authors starting from the 
beginning of the list and retaining the maximum possible number of authors.  
6.4 Acknowledgments  
6.4.1  Contributors  
All clinicians and scientists who contributed patient or data to the research,  relevant EORTC 
headquarters staff, and members of study -specific oversight or review committees who 
contributed to the research but who are not listed as co- author s are acknowledged in the 
publication.  
Representative(s) from the pharmaceutical companies and other partner organisations (e.g. , 
data repositories) are acknowledged in the publication as per contractual agreements.  
Patient representatives who were involved with the research are acknowledged for their 
contribution.  
6.4.2  Fundi ng bodies  
Sources of funding for the clinical study or research (e.g. , pharmaceutical companies, grant 
providers , financial support for fellowships ) must be acknowledged in all related publications.  
The exact phrasing is  supplied by the EORTC Headquarters  during the review of the article.  
For intergroup trials and other joint research ventures, any additional source of funding that 
supported partners ’ contribution to the research need to be identified and acknowledged.  
Some journals require explicit state ment regarding the role of the funding bodies. The 
following statement is expected to reflect the role accurately when the study is conducted 
independently and sponsored by EORTC: “The funders had no role in study design, data 
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 8 of 11 collection, data analysis, data interpretation, or writing of the report. The corresponding 
author had full access to all the data in the study and had final responsibility for the decision 
to submit for publication” . 
6.5 Affiliation  
6.5.1  Contributor who changed affiliation  
Whenever a contributor changed institution during the study, that contributor is listed with the 
affiliation he/she had at the time of her participation to the research, with the mention “(now 
at [new affiliation ])”. 
6.5.2  Contributors from EORTC headquarters  
Attribution of a publication to EORTC h eadquarters via search engines is dependent on the 
way an author lists their affiliation in the publication. All h eadquarter staff must be listed with 
the affiliation “EORTC Headquarters, Brussels, Belgium”, without men tion of a specific 
department or group.  
7 Data sharing statement  
EORTC has a data sharing policy in place which should be referred to as follows  
“Data shall be shared according to the EORTC data release policy 
(https://www.eortc.org/data -sharing/) ”. 
8 Review and approval of draft publication  
All co -authors of publications must have reviewed and approved the manuscript.  
Co-authors from the EORTC headquarters take care of the processing of the review within 
EORTC headquarter s. If no EORTC staff co- authors the publication, publications are 
addressed to the author of the present policy.   
Some EORTC groups require additional reviews by a group- specific review committee. Such 
rules must be adhered to when applicable.  
Whenever collaborative groups are involved in a study,  their review must comply with 
intergroup agreements. This review is coordinated by EORTC h eadquarters.  
Whenever a pharmaceutical company sponsors  the study, the publication review timelines 
are documented  in the contract with the sponsor. According to the EORTC principles of 
independence, the final decision to submit the manuscript for publication remains with the 
EORTC.  
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 9 of 11 8.1 Timelines for review of publications  
The review from all co -authors and partners must  conclude within 15 calendar days for 
abstracts and within 30 calendar days for full -length articles.   
9 Publication of perspectives on EORTC 
clinical trials in European Journal of Cancer  
Where a manuscript reporting the primary results of an EORTC clinical study is accepted for 
publication in another journal with a higher i mpact factor than that of the European Journal of 
Cancer, EORTC prepare s and submit s a perspective to the Journal, to be prepared 
according to the Journal’s Guide for Authors ( http://www.ejcancer.com/content/authorinfo ), 
and submitted within one (1) month of the publication of the clinical study results. The 
editorial provides  a summary  of the clinical study and the impact of the results for the 
scientific discipline.  
10 Definitions  
• Primary endpoint(s):  the outcome measure(s) identified as primary endpoint in the 
study protocol (or research project statistical analysis plan).  
• Secondary endpoint(s):  all other endpoints specified in the study protocol.  
• Publication: any public release or dissemination of research  results or disclosure of 
any confidential information, including but not li mited to intellectual property , but not 
including disclosure to regulatory authorities . In this document, the terms “ full-length 
publication” include the full range of formats published in peer -reviewed journals (for 
example, original research articles, short reports, reviews, or letters to the editor) and 
“abstract publication” includes abstracts, posters, and slides for oral pres entations at 
scientific congresses.  
• Independent data monitoring  committee (IDMC) : An independent group of 
individuals with pertinent expertise that may be established by the sponsor to assess 
at intervals the progress of a clinical trial, the safety data, and the critical efficacy 
endpoints, and to recommend to the sponsor whether to continue, modify, or stop a 
trial. 
• Research leader : can be the principal study coordinator(s) of clinical studies, 
coordinator of additional  research questions to clinical studies, and leader of research 
projects. He/she must be clearly identified in the research protocol.  
• Headquarters review coordinator : the scientist at EORTC headquarters who is the 
main leader on the research  
11 References  
• International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (Vancouver Group) -  Uniform 
Requirements for Manuscripts Submitted to Biomedical Journals 
(http://www.icmje.org/ ) 
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 10 of 11 • Good Publication Practice for Communicating Company -Spons ored Medical 
Research (GPP3). Battisti WP, Wager E, Baltzer L, et al. ; International Society for 
Medical Publication Professionals. Ann Intern Med. 2015 Sep 15;163(6):461- 4. doi: 
10.7326/M15- 0288 (www.ismpp.org/GPP3)  
  
Publication policy   Version 1.0 
Proprietary information of EORTC - No use without EORTC authorisation   Page 11 of 11 12 Signature  
This document will be elec tronically signed.   
The signatories acknowledge that electronic signature is legally binding and equivalent to a 
handwritten signature.  
Author  
 
Saskia Litière  
Head of statistics   
Approved  & authorized  by 
 
Denis Lacombe  
Chief executive officer