 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
  
 
INTERNATIONAL COUNCIL FOR HARMONISATION OF 
TECHNICAL REQUIREMENTS  FOR  PHARMACEUTICALS FOR  
HUMAN USE  
 
 
ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE  
 
 
TECHNICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCT LIFECYCLE MANAGEMENT  
Q12 
 
 
Final version  
Adopted on 20 November 2019 
 
 
 
 
 
This Guideline has been developed by the appropriate ICH Expert Working Group and 
has been subject to consultation by the regulatory parties, in accordance with the ICH 
Process.  At Step 4 of the Process the final draft is recommended for adoption to the 
regulatory bodies of ICH regions. 
 
 
 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
2 
 Q12  
Document History  
 
Code  History  Date  
Q12 Adopted by the Regulatory Members of the ICH 
Assembly under Step 4 (document dated 19 
November 2019) . 20 November 
2019 
Q12 Endorsement by the ICH Assembly under Step 2  
and release for public consultation.  16 November 
2017 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Legal notice: This document is protected by copyright and may, with the exception of 
the ICH logo, be used, reproduced, incorporated into other works, adapted, modified, 
translated or distributed under a public license provided that ICH's copyright in the 
document is acknowledged at all times.  In case of any adaption, modific ation or 
translation of the document, reasonable steps must be taken to clearly label, demarcate 
or otherwise identify that changes were made to or based on the original document.  
Any impression that the adaption, modification or translation of the original document 
is endorsed or sponsored by the ICH must be avoided. 
The document is provided "as is" without warranty of any kind.  In no event shall the 
ICH or the authors of the original document be liable for any claim, damages or other 
liability arising from the use of the document.  
The above -mentioned permissions do not apply to content supplied by third parties.  
Therefore, for documents where the copyright vests in a third party, permission for 
reproduction must be obtained from this copyright holder. 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
3 
   

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
4 
 ICH HARMONISED GUIDELINE  
 
TECHNICAL AND REGULATORY CONSIDERATIONS FOR 
PHARMACEUTICAL PRODUCT LIFECYCLE MANAGEMENT  
Q12 
ICH Consensus Guideline  
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS  
 
1 INTRODUCTION  ............................................................................................................ 6 
1.1 Objectives  ............................................................................................................ 6 
1.2 Scope  ................................................................................................................... 7 
1.3 ICH Q12 Regulatory Tools and Enablers  ............................................................ 7 
2 CATEGORISATION OF POST -APPROVAL CMC CHANGES  .................................. 9 
3 ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS (ECS)  ......................................................................... 10 
3.1 Introduction  ....................................................................................................... 10 
3.2 ECs in the Regulatory Submission  .................................................................... 10 
3.2.1  ECs Definition  .................................................................................. 10 
3.2.2  ECs in a Regulatory Dossier  ............................................................. 10 
3.2.3  Identification of ECs  ......................................................................... 11 
3.2.3.1  Identification of ECs for the Manufacturing Processes  11 
3.2.3.2  Identification of ECs for Analytical Procedures  ........... 13 
3.2.4  Revision of ECs  ................................................................................ 14 
3.3 Roles and Responsibilities  ................................................................................. 14 
4 POST -APPROVAL CHANGE MANAGEMEN T PROTOCOL (PACMP)  ................. 15 
4.1 Definition of a PACMP  ..................................................................................... 15 
4.2 Application of a PACMP  ................................................................................... 15 
4.3 Elements of a PACMP  ....................................................................................... 16 
4.4 Modification to an Approved PACMP  .............................................................. 17 
4.5 Types of PACMPs  ............................................................................................. 17 
5 PRODUCT LIFECYCLE MA NAGEMENT (PLCM) DOCUMENT  ........................... 18 
5.1 PLCM Document:  Scope  .................................................................................. 18 
5.2 Submitting the PLCM Document  ...................................................................... 18 
5.3 Maintenance of the PLCM Document  ............................................................... 18 
5.4 Format and Location of PLCM Document  ........................................................ 18 
6 PHARMACEUTICAL QUALI TY SYSTEM (PQS) AND CHANGE 
MANAGEMENT  ........................................................................................................... 19 
6.1 PQS General Considerations  ............................................................................. 19 
6.2 Change Management Across the Supply Chain and Product Lifecycle  ............ 20 
7 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN  REGULATORY ASSESSMEN T AND INSPECTION 20 
8 STRUCTURED APPROACHE S FOR FREQUENT CMC POST -APPROVAL 
CHANGES  ..................................................................................................................... 21 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
5 
 9 STABILITY DATA APPROACHES TO SUP PORT THE EVALUATION OF CMC 
CHANGES  ..................................................................................................................... 21 
10 GLOSSARY  ................................................................................................................... 22 
11 REFERENCES  ............................................................................................................... 23 
APPENDIX 1:  CTD SECTIONS THAT CONTAIN ECS  ................................................... 24 
APPENDIX 2:  PRINCIPLES OF CHANGE MANAGE MENT  .......................................... 30 
  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
6 
 1 INTRODUCTION  
1.1 Objectives 
This guideline provides a framework to facilitate the management of post -approval 
CMC changes in a more predictable and efficient manner .  A harmonised approach 
regarding technical and regulatory considerations for lifecycle management will benefit 
patients, industry , and regulatory authorities by promoting innovation and continual 
improvement in the pharmaceutical  sector, strengthening quality assurance and 
improving supply of medicinal products.  
The concepts outlined in prior ICH Quality Guidelines (ICH Q8 (R2), Q9, Q10 and Q11) 
provide opportunities for science - and risk- based approaches for use in drug 
development and regulatory decisions.  These guidelines are valuable in the assessment 
of Chemistry, Manufacturing and Controls ( CMC ) changes across the product lifecycle.   
ICH Q8 (R2) and Q11 guidelines focus mostly on early stage aspects of the product 
lifecycle (i.e., product development, registration and launch).  This guideline address es 
the commercial phase of the product lifecycle (as described in ICH Q10); and it both 
complements and adds to the flexible regulatory approaches to post -approval CMC 
changes described in ICH Q8(R2) and Q10 Annex 1.  
This guideline is also intended to demonstrate how increased product and process 
knowle dge can contribute to a more precise and accurate understanding of which post -
approval changes require a regulatory submission as well as the definition of the level 
of reporting categories for such changes (i.e., a better understanding of risk to product 
quality).  Increased knowledge and effective implementation of the tools and enablers 
described in this guideline should enhance industry’s ability to manage many CMC 
changes effectively under the company’s Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS) with 
less need for extensive regulatory oversight prior to implementation.  This approach 
can incentivize continual improvement by providing an opportunity for greater 
flexibility in making post- approval changes.   It could also result in fewer associated 
post-approval submissions to the Marketing Authorisation Application ( MAA) , and 
less associated regulatory burden.   The extent of this operational and regulatory 
flexibility and its adequate implementation is subject to the regulatory framework in 
place, as well as prod uct and process understanding (ICH Q8(R2) and Q11), application 
of quality risk management principles (ICH Q9), and an effective pharmaceutical 
quality system (ICH Q10).  
Regulatory Members of ICH are encouraged t o provide publicly available information, 
preferably on their website, about the implementation of ICH Q12 in their region, 
especially with regard to regulatory considerations .

ICH Q12 Guideline  
7 
 1.2 Scope  
This guideline applies to pharmaceutical drug substances1 and products  (both chemical 
and biological)  that require a marketing authorization ; and  to drug -device combination 
products that meet the definition of a pharmaceutical or biological product.  Changes 
needed to comply with new or revised pharmacopoeial monographs are  not within the 
scope of this guideline . 
1.3  ICH Q12 Regulatory Tools and Enablers  
Use of the following harmonised regulatory tools and enablers with associated guiding 
principles, as described in this guideline, will enhance the management of post-approval 
changes,  and transparency between industry and regulatory authorities, supporting  
innovation and continual improvement. 
• Categorisation of Post -Approval CMC Changes ( Chapter 2 ) 
Categorisation of Post -Approval CMC Changes describes a  framework that 
encompass es a risk -based categorisation for the type of communication 
expected of the Marketing Authorisation Holder (MAH)  with the regulatory 
authority regarding CMC changes . 
• Established Conditions (ECs) ( Chapter 3 )  
The concept of ECs  provides a clear understanding between the MAH and 
regulatory authorities regarding the elements to assure product quality and that 
involve  a regulatory communication, if changed.  This gui deline describes how 
ECs are identified as well as what information can be designated as supportive 
information that would not involve  a regulatory communication , if changed.  In 
addition, guidance is included for managing revisions of the ECs .  
• Post-Approval Change Management Protocol (PACMP) ( Chapter 4 )  
 
The PACMP is a regulatory tool that provides predictability regarding the 
information required to support a CMC change and the type of regulatory 
submission based on prior agreement between the MAH and regulatory 
authority.  Such a mechanism enables planning and implementation of future 
changes to ECs  in an efficient and predictable manner.  
• Product Lifecycle Management (PLCM)  Document ( Chapter 5 ) 
The P LCM document serves as a central repository for the ECs  and th e 
associated reporting category for changes  made to ECs.  The document also 
captures how a product will be managed during the  commercial  phase of the  
lifecycle  including relevant post -approval CMC commitments and PACMPs. 
                                                 
1  For drug substance information incorporated by reference (e.g., a Master File) in a n MAA , the holder 
of the referenced information may use Q12 tools where applicable. Use of Q12 tools is not intended 
to change the responsibilities for the holder of the referenced information, the MAH or the regulatory 
authority.  For example, the holder of the referenced information  has a responsibility to report relevant 
drug substance changes to the MAH referencing their submission, so that the MAH can assess the 
impact of the change and report any related change s to the approved MAA , as necessary and per 
regional requirements.  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
8 
 • Pharmaceutical Quality System (PQS)  and Change Management ( Chapter 6 ) 
An effective PQS as described in ICH Q10 and compliance with regional GMP s 
are necessary to gain full benefit from this guideline.  In particular, management 
of manufacturing changes across the supply chain is an essential part of an 
effective change management system.   This guideline provides 
recommendations for robust change management across single or multiple 
entities involved in the manufacture of a pharmaceutical product.  
• Relationship Between Regulatory Assessment and Inspection ( Chapter 7 ) 
This guideline outlines  the complementary roles of regulatory assessment and 
inspection in the oversight of post -approval changes;  and how communication 
between assessors and inspectors facilitates the use of the tools included herein.    
• Structured Approaches for Frequent CMC Post -Approval Changes  (Chapter 8 ) 
In addition to the  other tools described above, this guideline describes a strategy 
for a structured approach applicable to frequent CMC changes, and a discussion 
of data expectations, to  enable the use of  immediate or other post -
implementation notification .   
• Stability Data Approaches to Support the Evaluation of CMC Changes  (Chapter 
9) 
This guideline provides additional science - and risk- based approaches that are 
relevant to strategies for confirmatory stability studies to enab le more timely 
implementation of CMC changes.   
Tools and enablers described above are complementary and are intended to link 
different phases of the product lifecycle.  Pharmaceutical development activities result 
in an appropriate  control strategy, eleme nts of which are considered to be Established 
Conditions .  All CMC changes to an approved product are managed through a 
company ’s Pharmaceutical Quality System ; changes to ECs  must also be reported to 
the regulatory authority.  Where the regulatory system provides for Categorisation of 
Post-approval CMC Changes  for reporting according to risk, the MAH may propose 
reporting categories for changes to ECs  based on risk and knowledge gained through 
enhanced pharmaceutical development .  A system with risk -based reporting categories 
also facilitates the use of Post -Approval Change Management Protocols , which 
provide predictability regarding planning for future changes to ECs .  The Product 
Lifecycle Management Document  is a summary that transparently conveys to the 
regulatory authority how the MAH plans to manage post -approval CMC changes.   The 
tools and enablers in this guideline do not change the Relationship Between 
Regulatory Assessment and Inspection ; however, collaboration and commu nication  
between assessors and inspectors  are necessary for the implementation of this guideline 
by regulators.  This guideline provides  Structured  Approaches  for Frequent CMC 
Post-Approval Changes to enable the implementation of certain CMC changes for 
authorised products without the  need for prior regulatory review and approval.  Finally,  
this guideline provides Stability Data Approaches to Support the Evaluation of 
CMC Changes ; i.e., where the stability study is undertaken to confirm previously 
approved storage conditions and shelf -life.     

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
9 
 2 CATEGORISATION OF POST-APPROVAL CMC  CHANGES  
Regulatory mechanisms that allow the timely and efficient introduction of CMC 
changes are important for drug quality, safety, and availability.  There is a range of 
potential CMC changes for which communication between a company  and the 
regulatory authority is required.  CMC changes vary  from low to high potential risk 
with respect to product quality , safety, and efficacy .  A well -characteris ed, ri sk-based 
categorisation of regulatory communication requirements is important to the efficient 
use of industry and regulatory resources . 
In such a regulatory system, the types of CMC changes that occur during the 
commercial phase of the pharmaceutical prod uct lifecycle that invoke communication 
with regulatory authorities are classified with regard to the potential to have an adverse 
effect on product quality of the drug product.  The regulatory communication category, 
supporting information/documentation requirements, and associated time frame for 
evaluation are commensurate with that potential risk .  Based on potential risk, an 
inspection may be needed. 
Regulatory authorities are encouraged to utilise a system that incorporates risk -based 
regulatory proces ses for (a) requesting prior  approval from the regulatory authority, (b) 
notifying the regulatory authority, or (c) simply recording CMC changes, with 
associated information requirements and, where applicable, timeframes for decision.  
Such a system would include the following categories for regulatory communications 
with one or more levels in each case:  
• Prior  approval :  Certain changes are considered to have sufficient risk to 
require regulatory authority review and approval prior to i mplementation and 
are requested by the MAH in a suitably detailed regulatory submission.   
• Notification :  Certain moderate - to low -risk changes are judged to not require 
prior approval and generally require less information to support the change.  
These ch anges are communicated to the regulatory authority as a formal 
notification that takes place within a defined period of time before or after 
implementation, according to regional requirements.  A mechanism for 
immediate notification is useful when prior ap proval is not required, but timely 
awareness of the change by the regu lator is considered necessary.  
In addition, the changes  that are not required to be reported to regulators  are only 
managed and documented within the PQS, but may be verified  during routine or other 
inspection. 
Harmonisation or convergence toward a system of risk- based categorisation of post -
approval changes is encouraged as an important step toward achieving the objectives 
of this guideline .  Such a system provides inherent, valuable  flexibility in regulatory 
approach and a framework that can support additional reg ulatory opportunities such as:  
- Facilitating the use of tools and enablers described in this guideline by providing 
a range of request and notification categories available as a target for a lowering 
of regulatory submission requirements . 
- The use of a lower category for request/notification if certain criteria/conditions 
are met  and the relevant supporting documentation is provided as described in 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
10 
 regional regulatory guidance ; the need for regulatory inspection associated with 
the change may preclude the ability to use a lower category.  
- Providing options for converging to the same or similar reporting category as 
that in other jurisdictions .  
A risk -based categorisation system may be accomplished by having the principles  
captured in regulations with further details in guidance, which can provide additional 
flexibility to modify expectations as science and technology evolve.  For examples of 
risk-based categorisation systems, refer to existing regulations and guidance of ICH 
members, and WHO guidelines and guidance on changes to authorised products. 
3 ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS  (EC S) 
3.1 Introduction  
This guideline establishes a harmonised approach to defining which elements in an 
application are considered necessary to assure product quality and therefore would 
require a regulatory submission if changed post -approval.  These elements are being 
defined in this guideline as “ Establ ished Conditions for Manufactur ing and Control ” 
(referred to as ECs  throughout this guideline).  
3.2 ECs in the Regulatory Submission  
3.2.1 ECs Definition  
ECs are legally binding information considered necessary  to assure product quality.  As 
a consequence, any change to ECs  necessitates a submission to the regulatory authority.    
3.2.2 ECs in a Regulatory Dossier 
This chapter describes scientific risk -based approaches which can be used when 
defining ECs and their reporting categories.  Regional legal frameworks, supplemented 
through regulation and guidance, may define ECs with their reporting categories and/or 
may allow the scientific risk -based approaches described in this chapter to be 
considered.  
All regulatory dossiers  contain a combination of ECs  and supportive information.  
Supportive information is not considered to be ECs  but is provided to share with 
regulators the development and ma nufacturing information at an appropriate level of 
detail .   Knowledge gained throughout the product lifecycle (i ncluding pharmaceutical 
development and characterisation of chemical and biological drug substance and drug 
product) is the basis for identifying the elements of CMC  that are ECs and those 
elements which are supportive information.  
An MAH should clearly i dentif y the elements of CMC  which they consider to be an EC 
and those which they consider to be  supportive information.  The rationales for the ECs 
are provided in the appropriate CTD modules .  
Similarly, the rationales for the associated reporting categories for changes to the ECs 
should be provided in the appropriate CTD modules .  The regulator assesses the ECs 
with respect to established scientific guidelines .  Where appropriate, regulators approve 
the EC and associated report ing category in line with the principles outlined in Chapter 
2.  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
11 
 See Appendix 1  for more information regarding sections of the dossier that contain ECs 
and supportive informa tion.  Unless otherwise specified by regulatory requirement 
identifying ECs for a given product is not mandatory.  
ECs should not be confused with CMC regulatory commitments (e.g. , stability , post -
approval CMC commitment  and other commitments ) made by a MAH to provide data 
or information to the regulatory agency in a  MAA.  Such information, in the context of 
this guideline , is considered supportive information.  Changes to CMC regulatory 
commitments are managed according to existing regional regulations and guidance.  
3.2.3 Identification of ECs 
This chapter  outlines approaches to define ECs for manufacturing processes and 
analytical procedures .  A similar approach can be used  to define other types of ECs 
(e.g., performance of the container closure system , device el ements of drug- device 
combination products ) and should be justified by the applicant and approved by the 
regulatory agency.  
The extent  of ECs may vary based on the company’s  development approach, product 
and process understanding, and  the potential risk to product quality .  Appropriate 
justification should be provided in support of the identification of ECs , the proposed 
reporting categories for ECs,  and those aspects that are not ECs.  
3.2.3.1  Identification of ECs for the Manufacturing Processes  
A control strategy is designed to ensure that a product of required quality will be 
produced consistently (ICH Q8(R2)) .  It is a planned set of controls, derived from 
current product and process understanding, that assures process performance and 
product quality.  The controls can include parameters and attributes related to drug 
substance and drug product materials and comp onents, facility and equipment operating 
conditions, in- process controls, finished product specifications, and the associated 
methods and frequency of monitoring and control (ICH Q10).  
 
The ECs for a manufacturing process should be defined, based on produc t and process 
understanding, taking into account all the relevant elements of the control strategy.  In 
addition to the unit operation and the sequence of steps, and in considering the overall 
control strategy, ECs proposed and justified in a manufacturing  process description 
should be those inputs (e.g., process parameters, material attributes) and outputs (that 
may include in -process controls) that are necessary to assure product quality.  
 
Process parameter s that need to be controlled to ensure that a product of required quality 
will be produced should be considered ECs.  These ECs are identified through an initial 
risk assessment and application of knowledge gained from executed studies, prior 
knowledge, and a criticality assessment that determines the  level of impact that a 
process parameter could have on product quality.  The criticality assessment should 
account for severity of harm and whether the ranges studied sufficiently account for the 
expected variability in the EC.  CPPs and other process parameters where an impact on 
product quality cannot be reasonably excluded should be identified as ECs .  
 
Once ECs are identified, an updated assessment of the potential risk to product quality 
associated with changing the EC, takin g into account the overall control strategy  
informs the reporting category for the EC .  The assessment of potential risk is derived 
from risk management activities as described in ICH Q9. The output of the risk 
assessment can include changes to manufacturi ng process ECs that range from high to 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
12 
 low risk  to product quality .  The reporting category should be defined based on level of 
risk. A justification of the potential risk for changing ECs and corresponding reporting 
categories should be provided. 
 
A decis ion tree which illustrates the above step -wise approach to identifying ECs and 
reporting categories for process parameters is shown in Figure 1.   The principles in the  
decision tree can be applied to identify  ECs for other parts of the manufacturing proces s 
and control strategy (e.g., relevant elements of input material attributes, equipment, and 
in-process controls) and associated reporting categories.   
Figure 1: Decision  Tree for Identification of ECs and Associated Reporting Categories 
for Manufacturing Process Parameters  
 
The details of ECs and the associated reporting category  will depend on the extent to 
which the company  can apply knowledge from product and process understanding (i.e.,  
development and experience accumulated throughout the product lif ecycle ) to manage 
the risks to product quality.   Different a pproaches  can be used  alone, or in combination, 
to identify ECs for manufacturing processes ; these  include, but are not limited to the 
following:  
 
• Parameter -based approach es, including:  
o A minimal2 approach, with a limited understanding of the relationship 
between inputs and resulting quality attributes, will include a larg e 
number of input s (e.g., process parameters and material  attribute s) along 
with outputs (including in- process tests ).  
                                                 
2 Also referred to as “traditional” in ICH Q11.  


ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
13 
 o An enhanced  approach  with increased understanding of interaction 
between inputs and product quality attributes together with a 
corresponding  control strategy can lead to identification of ECs  that are 
focused on the most important input parameters along with outputs, as 
appropriate.  
• In a performance- based approach , ECs could be primarily focused on control 
of process outputs (e.g., attributes, measurements, responses) rather than 
process inputs (e.g., process parameters and material attributes).  This is enabled 
by knowledge gained from an enhanced approach, a data- rich environment , and 
an enhanced control strategy (e.g., models, Process Analytical Technology 
(PAT)) .  For example, a performance -based approach could be considered for 
manufacturing process steps with  in-line monitoring of relevant attributes or 
with feedback controls or optimi sation algorithms to achieve the relevant target s 
for that process step.   When considering this approach, it is important to ensure 
that all relevant parameters and material attr ibutes that have a potential to 
impact product quality are monitored and equipment used remains qualified in 
order to assure a stable process  It should be noted that not all elements of the 
decision tree in Figure 1 apply because the enhanced control strat egy used may 
remove the need for certain process parameters to be ECs.      
Use of this guideline should not lead to providing a less detailed manufacturing process 
description in the MAA.  A suitably detailed description of the manufacturing process 
in Module 3 is expected to provide a clear understanding regardless of the approach 
used to identify ECs for manufacturing process parameters.  Manufacturing process 
descriptions include supportive information as well as identified ECs.  Information  
regarding p roduct -specific post -approval change activities, such as post -change 
monitoring, may be provided as supporting information to aid in the determination of 
ECs and associated reporting categories .  Criticality and risk should be periodically 
reviewed  (as expected by ICH Q10) during the lifecycle of the product and the ECs and 
reporting categories should be updated based on acquired knowledge.  
When implementing the change, and consistent with Appendix 2 , an MAH should  
consider the impact of  the planned change, whether concurrent changes are planned, 
and if the originally proposed reporting category should be revised.  
This guidance does not impose  additional regulatory filing expectations for process ECs 
due to non- conformance during routine operations.  Non-conformance to process -
related ECs should be handled in accordance with GMP regulations (i.e., deviation/non-
conformance handling process ). 
3.2.3.2  Identification of ECs for Analytical Procedures  
Similar to the principles des cribed for manufacturing process, ECs  related to analyt ical 
procedures should include elements which assure performance of the procedure.   The 
extent of ECs and their reporting categories could vary based on the degree of the 
understanding of the relations hip between method parameters and method performance, 
the method complexity , and control strategy.  A justification to support the 
identification of ECs  and corresponding reporting categories for changes to ECs based 
on risk management should be provided.  
Different approaches can be used to identify ECs for analytical procedures, for example 
as analytical technology and development approaches advance; these approaches 
include, but are not limited to the following:  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
14 
 • When more limited development studies have been conducted this may result 
in a narrow operating window to ensure method performance.  In such cases 
ECs may be more extensive with fixed and/or tight conditions.   
• Enhanced understanding can lead to a wider operating window that ensures 
method perform ance, where ECs can be reduced and focused on method 
performance (e.g., method parameters acceptable ranges rather than set points, 
performance criteria).  
Use of this guideline should not lead to providing a less detailed description of 
analytical procedu res in the MAA.   A suitably detailed description of the analytical 
procedures in Module 3 is expected to provide a clear understanding regardless of the 
approach used to identify ECs for analytical procedures.   Description of analytical 
procedures includes  supportive information as well as identified ECs . 
3.2.4 Revision of ECs  
It may be necessary to  change approved ECs  as a result of knowledge gained during 
the product lifecycle (e.g., manufacturing experience, introduction of new technologies 
or changes in the control strategy).  
Options available for the MAH to change approved ECs , and to revise the associated 
reporting category for approved ECs  include:  
• Submission of an appropriate post -approval regulatory submission describing 
and justifying the proposed revisi on to the approved ECs .  Justification may 
include information such as validation data  and batch analys es. 
• Submission of  a PACMP, in the original MAA or as part of a post -approval 
submission, describing a revision to ECs  or reporting categories, and how the 
change will be justified and reported.  
• Use of an approved post -approval regulat ory commitment, as appropriate.  
3.3 Roles and Responsibilities  
The management of all changes to , and maintenance of , the approved marketing 
authorisation is the responsibility of the MAH.   There is a joint responsibility to share 
and utilis e information between the MAH and any manufacturing organis ation s to 
assure  the marketing authorisation is maintained, reflects current operations, and that 
changes are implemented appropriately across relevant sites.   Maintenance of the 
marketing authorisation should follow  regional expectations.  See Chapte r 6 for 
information related to interactions between a n MAH and any manufacturing 
organisations . 
For any referenced submission (e.g., Type II Drug Master File, Active Substance 
Master File) in a n MAA, the holder of the referenced submission has a responsibi lity 
to communicate  changes to their ECs  to the MAH referencing their submission, so that 
the MAH can assess the impact of the change and report any related change to the ECs  
found in the approved MAA, as necessary and per regional requirements.  
The approv al of ECs  and subsequent changes to ECs is the responsibility of the 
regulatory authorities.  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
15 
 4 POST-APPROVAL CHANGE MANAGEMENT PROTOCOL (PACMP)  
4.1 Definition of a PACMP  
A PACMP is a regulatory tool that provides predictability and transparency in terms of 
the requirements and studies needed to implement a change as the approved protocol 
provides an agreement between the MAH  and the regulatory authority.  A protocol 
descri bes the CMC change an MAH intends  to implement during the commercial  phase 
of a product  lifecycle, how the  change would be prepared and verified, including 
assessment of the impact of the proposed change, and the suggested reporting category 
in line with regional regulations and guidance , i.e., a lower reporting category and/or 
shortened review period as compared to similar change procedu re without an approved 
PACMP.  The PACMP also identifies specific conditions and acceptance criteria to be 
met.  A PACMP can address one or more changes for a single product, or may address 
one or more changes to be applied to multipl e products (see section 4.5 ).  The PACMP 
may be submitted with the original MAA or subsequently as a standalone submission  
and can be proposed independent of any prior identification of ECs .  The PACMP 
requires approval by the regulatory authority, and the conditions and acceptance criteria 
outlined in the protocol must be met and results  communicated to the regulatory 
authority in the manner previously agreed, in order to implement the change(s).  
A PACMP should describe changes with a level of detail commensurate with the 
complexity of the change.  Once approved, there is an expectation  that the validity of 
the proposed approach and control strategy  is confirmed prior to implementation of the 
change(s).  For example, if new information becomes available following approval of 
the protocol , the risk assessment provided in the initial PACMP submission should be 
reviewed by the MAH  before implementing the change(s) , to ensure that the outcomes 
of that risk assessment as they pertain to the planned change(s) are still valid.  If the 
review of the initial risk assessment indicates an increased level of risk associated with 
execution of the change, the previously approve d reporting category should no longer 
be considered appropriate ; instead, existing regional regulation or guidance should be 
followed or the relevant regulatory authority consulted .   
The MAH is responsible for ensuring that whenever a CMC change is to be introduced 
under a PACMP, the facility meets the regulatory requirements of the regulatory 
jurisdiction where the PACMP was approved with respect to GMP compliance, and 
inspection or licensing status.  
4.2 Application of a PACMP  
The application of a PACMP  proc ess typically involves the following two steps:  
Step 1: Submission of a written protocol that describes the proposed change(s), its 
rationale(s), risk management activities, proposed studies and acceptance criteria to 
assess the impact of the change(s), o ther conditions to be met (e.g., confirmation that 
there is no change to the approved specification), the proposed reporting category for 
the change(s), and any other supportive information (see also below).  The 
PACMP  document can be located in CTD Module  3.2.R.3  This protocol is reviewed 
and approved by the regulatory authority in advance of execution of the protocol . 
                                                 
3 In some regions, the PACMP may be included in other modules.  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
16 
 Step 2: The tests and studies outlined in the protocol are performed .  If the results/data 
generated meet the acceptance criteria in the p rotocol and any other conditions are met, 
the MAH submits this information to the regulatory authority according to the 
categorisation (classification) in the approved protocol for review by the regulatory 
authority as appropriate.  Depending on the report ing category, approval by the 
regulatory authority may or may not be required prior to implementation of the change.  
If the acceptance criteria and/or other conditions in the protocol (see step 1) are not met, 
the change cannot be implemented using this a pproach and should instead follow 
existing regulation or guidance and associated reporting category .  
Significant changes to the manufacturing process or controls that were not anticipated 
in the PACMP step 1 (e.g., change of order of unit operations) cannot be implemented 
as part of step 2 and should be the subject of a regulatory submission as governed by 
regional regulation or guidance.  However, minor unanticipated modifications of the 
process or controls related to the intended change and n ot affecting the technical 
principles of the protocol are normally considered within scope, if appropriately 
justified.  
No change outlined in a PACMP should introduce any additional risks to pati ent safety, 
product quality or efficacy.  A CMC change that w ould require supportive efficacy, 
safety (clinical or non -clinical), or human PK/PD data to evaluate the effect of the 
change (e.g., certain formulation changes, clinical or non- clinical studies to evaluate 
new impurities, assessment of immunogenicity/anti genicity) is not suitable for 
inclusion in a PACMP.  
4.3 Elements  of a PACMP  
The development of the PACMP is informed by the application of process and product 
understanding gained from product development and/or manufacturing experience.  A 
PACMP would typica lly include the following, e.g.:   
• A detailed description of  the proposed change(s ), including a rationale .  The 
differences before and after the proposed change(s) should be clearly 
highlighted (e.g., in a tabular format).  
 
• Based on an initial risk assessment, a list of specific tests and studies to be 
performed to evaluate the potential impact of the proposed change(s), such as: 
characterisation, batch release, stability (as appropriate, see Chapter 9), in-
process controls.  The PACMP should include an appropriate description of the 
analytical procedures and proposed acceptance criteria for each test or study.  
• Discussion regarding  the suitability of the approved control strategy or any 
changes needed to the control strategy associated with  the planned change(s). 
• Any other conditions to be met, such as confirmation that certain process 
qualification steps will be completed before implementation.  
• Where applicable, supportive data from previous e xperience with the same or 
similar products related to: development, manufacturing, characterisation, batch 
release, and stability to allow for risk mitigation.  
• Proposed reporting category for step 2 of the PACMP. 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
17 
 • Confirmation , as appropriate,  that ongoing  verification will be performed under 
the PQS to continue to evaluate and ensure that there is no adverse effect of the 
change(s) on product quality.  In cases where monitoring of the impact on 
product quality following implementation of the change(s) is r equired, a 
summary of the quality risk management activities should be provided to 
support the proposed PACMP.  If multiple changes are to be implemented, these 
activities should address the potential risk from the cumulative effect of 
multiple changes and how they are linked.  
The MAH should demonstrate in the PACMP suitable scientific knowledge and 
understanding of aspects impacted by the proposed change in order to conduct an 
appropriate risk assessment of the proposed change(s).  Typically, more complex  
changes would require enhanced product/ process understanding.  
4.4 Modification to  an Approved PACMP  
A modification to an already approved PACMP , such as replacement or revis ion of a 
test, study or acceptance criterion , should provide the same or greater capability to 
assess the effect of the proposed change on the product quality  and would normally 
involve a notification  type of communication with the regulatory authority.  A 
modification that more significantly alters the content of the protocol may require either 
prior  approval of a protocol amendment or submission of a new protocol, as agreed 
upon with the regulatory authority.  
4.5 Types of PACMPs  
There are different types of PACMPs:  
• One or more change(s) associated with a single product –  see above and 
Annex es ID and 1E , for content and implementation.  A PACMP can also be 
designed to be used repeatedly to make a specified type of CMC change over 
the lifecycle of a product, applying the same principles.  
If the protocol de scribes several changes for a particular product, a justification 
should be added showing how the changes are related and that inclusion  in a 
single protocol is appropriate.  
• Broader protocols – the general principles outlined above apply.  The risk of the 
proposed change(s) should be similar across products; additional considerations 
should be taken into account depending on the approach, for example:  
a. One or more changes to be implemented across multiple products (e.g., 
change in stopper across multiple pr oducts that use the same container 
closure system): the same risk mitigation strategy should be applicable 
across all impacted products;  
b. One or more changes to be implemented across multiple products and at 
multiple sites (e.g., change in analytical method  across multiple sites, 
change in manufacturing site(s) across multiple products): the same risk 
mitigation strategy should be applicable across all impacted products 
and/or sites ( see Annex  IE). 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
18 
 5 PRODUCT  LIFECYCLE  MANAGEMENT (PLCM)  DOCUMENT  
The PLCM document outlines the specific plan for product lifecycle management  that 
includes the ECs, reporting categories for changes to ECs, PACMPs (if used) and any 
post-approval CMC commitments .  Its purpose i s to encourage prospective lifecycle 
management planning by the MAH and to facilitate regulatory assessment  and 
inspect ion.  The PLCM document should be  updated throughout the product lifecycle 
as needed .   
5.1 PLCM Document:  Scope  
The PLCM document serves a s a central repository in the MAA for ECs and reporting 
categories for making changes to ECs. It include s the key elements described  below 
and references to the  related  information lo cated elsewhere in the MAA (see Annex I F). 
Submission of the PLCM document is  critical when the MAH proposes ECs in line 
with the risk -based approaches in  Chapter 3 . 
 
The elements of the PLCM document are summarised below :  
• ECs (refer to Chapter  3):  The ECs for the product should be listed in the PLCM  
document .  The identification and justification of ECs are located in the relevant 
section s of the CTD . 
 
• Reporting category for making changes to approved ECs  (refer to Chapter  
3):  The reporting categories when making a change to an EC  should be listed 
in the PLCM document.  The detailed justification of the reporting categories is 
located in the relevant sections of the CTD.   
• PACMPs  (refer to Chapter  4): PACMPs that are submitted to prospectively 
manage and implement one or more  post -approval changes  should be listed .   
• Post-approval CMC commitments: specified  CMC development activities , 
agreed between the MAH and regulatory authority at the time of approval  (e.g., 
specific process monitoring, additional testing ) that will be performed  during  
the commercial phase should be listed in the PLCM document .   
5.2 Submitting the PLCM Document  
The PLCM document is submitted in  the original MAA or in a supplement/variation 
for marketed products when  defining ECs ( Chapter 3 ).   
5.3 Maintenance of the PLCM Document  
An updated PLCM document should be included in post -approval submissions for 
CMC changes.  The updated PLCM document will capture the change in ECs and other 
associated elements (reporting category, commitments, PACMP).  The MAH should 
follow regional expectations for maintaining a revision history for the PLCM  
document .   
5.4 Format and Location of PLCM Document  
A tabular format is recommended  to capture certain elements of PLCM described 
in section 5.1, but other appropriate formats can be used. See Annex I F for an example 
PLCM table.  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
19 
 The PLCM document can be located in CTD Module  3.2.R .4 
6 PHARMACEUTICAL  QUALITY SYSTEM (PQS)  AND CHANGE MANAGEMENT  
6.1 PQS General Considerations  
An effective PQS as described  in ICH Q10 and in compliance with regional GMP  
requirement s where the application is filed , is necessary across the  entire  supply chain 
and product lifecycle to support use of the tools described in this guideline.  It includes 
appropriate change management, enabled by knowledge management, and 
management review .  The principles are further elaborated in Appendix 2 .  The 
relationship between  knowledge management, change management, and the regulatory 
process for EC s are illustrated in F igure 2.  
Figure 2 : Connection Between Knowledge Management and Change 
Management Process  
 
Maintaining a n effective PQS is the responsibility of a company (manufacturing s ites 
and MAH where relevant) . It is not the intent of this guideline  to require a specific 
inspection assessing the state of the PQS before the company  can use the principle s in 
this guideline.   The conduct of inspections in connection with submitted MAAs  and 
surveillance will nevertheless continue as foreseen by re gional  regulatory requirements. 
It is understood that a  manufacturing site  can be considered to be in general GMP 
compliance while resolving deficiencies that do not require regulatory  action.   In the 
event that such deficiencies have an impact on the effectiven ess of change management 
                                                 
4 In some regions, the PLCM may be included in Module 1.  


ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
20 
 in the PQS , it may result in restrictions on the ability to utilise flexibility  in this 
guideline . 
6.2 Change Management A cross the S upply C hain and Product L ifecycle   
Supply chains involve multiple stakeholders (e.g., MAHs,  R&D  organisations , 
manufactur ers, Contract Manufacturing Organisation s, suppliers).  It is important that 
these stakeholders interact to effectively utilise knowledge and manage changes during 
the product lifecycle.  
A company  has to manage communication of information and interaction s of PQS s 
across multiple entitie s (internal and external) .  Therefore , the implementation of robust 
change management across multiple sites (outsourced or not) is necessary.  In 
conjunction with change control principles in Appendix 2, the following change 
management activities s hould be considered to support the approaches defined in this 
guideline:   
• Change s to ECs sh ould be communicated in a timely fashion between the MAH 
and the regulators , and between the MAH and the manufacturing chain (and 
vice versa).  
• The timeliness of communication is driven by the impact of any change related 
to EC s and should be targeted to those entities in the chain that need to be aware 
of or to implement the  chan ge over the lifecycle of the product.  
• Process knowledge and continual  improvement are drivers  for change. For 
example,  a CMO  may be in a position to propose  process improvements which 
significantly improve control and product consistency.   These data can b e 
utilised to revis e the ECs and associated PLCM document .  The organisation 
responsible for batch release should be aware of all relevant changes and where 
applicable, be involved in the decision making.  
• The communication mechanisms regarding MAA  changes and GMP issues  
should be defined in relevant documentation, inclu ding contracts with CMOs .  
• A critical failure in a PQS anywhere in the supply chain may i mpact the ability 
to use the tools in this guideline; therefore , the company should communicate  
such f ailures to affected  regulatory authorities.  
7 RELATIONSHIP BETWEEN REGULATORY ASSESSMENT AND INSPE CTION  
Regulatory assessment and inspection are complementary activities and their 
fundamental roles remain unchanged by this guideline.  Nevertheless, effective 
communication  between assessors and inspectors can facilitate regulatory oversight of 
product lifecycle management. 
 
Appropriate mechanisms to share knowledge and information obtained through 
inspection or assessment activities can facilitate access to necessary information and 
mitigate increased submission burden on the MAH.  For example, the conclusions  from  
inspections  should be available to assessors to support ongoing oversight of product 
lifecycle management and t he most recent  PLCM document, when applicable, should 
be available to inspectors  so they are aware of the currently approved status of the 
PLCM elements .   

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
21 
  
Communication is encouraged between regulators across regions , in accordance with 
appropriate bila teral/multilateral arrangements ; for example, to communicate about 
critical failures in aspects of a company’s PQS that may impact the use of tools 
described in this guideline . 
8 STRUCTURED APPROACHES FOR FREQUENT CMC  POST-APPROVAL CHANGES  
In addition to the other tools described in this guideline, a simplified approach to 
accomplish certain CMC changes is needed for products whose marketing authorization 
did not involve identification of ECs with associated reporting categories .  This chapter  
describes a strategy for a structured approach for frequent CMC changes and includes 
a discussion of the data requirements for CMC changes (e.g., stability) .   
The strategy described for structured approaches to frequent CMC changes is 
exemplified with a description o f an approach for analytical procedure changes in 
Annex I I.  Similar structured approaches could be developed and applied for other 
frequent CMC changes such as scale, packaging , etc.  These approaches may be applied 
when the following conditions exist:  
• The company’s PQS change management process is  effective and in compliance 
as described in C hapter 6  and incorporates  an appropriate risk management 
system . 
• A structured approach  can be found in Annex I I and describes the scope and the 
steps to be followed, including, where appropriate, data to be generated and 
criteria to be met.  Compliance with the requirements of relevant 
internationally -agreed Standards and/or regulatory guidelines may be specified 
as part of the structured approach.  
If the approach is followed and all criteria are met, the change can be made with 
immediate or other post -implementation notification, as appropriate, to the  relevant 
regulatory authorities .  The flexibility provided in Annex  II may not be available in all 
regions and in all situations; some specific changes may require prior approval as 
defined in regional guidance . 
9 STABILITY DATA APPROACHES TO SUPPORT THE EVALUATION OF CMC  CHANGE S  
The data needed for submission to the regul atory authority in support of a post -approval 
change is established by regional regulations and guidance.  This guideline provides 
additional science-  and risk- based approaches that can be used to develop strategies for 
confirmatory stability studies supporting post -approval changes to enable more timely 
filing, approval, and implementation of the changes.  Such approaches could be 
included in a  PACMP (see Annex es ID and I E). 
Unlike the formal stability studies recommended in ICH Q1A(R2), whose objective is 
to establish a useful shelf -life and storage conditions for a new, yet -to-be-marketed drug 
substance/drug product, the purpose of stability s tudies, if needed, to support a post -
approval CMC change is to confirm the previously approved shelf -life and storage 
conditions.  The scope and design of such stability studies are informed by the 
knowledge and experience of the drug product and drug subs tance acquired since 
authorisation.  Approaches to the design of such studies should be appropriately 
justified and may include: 

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
22 
 • Identifying the stability -related quality attributes and shelf -life-limiting 
attributes  relative to the intended CMC changes, b ased on risk assessments and 
previously generated data  
• Use of appropriate tools to evaluate the impact of the intended change. These 
may include: 
o Drug substance and/or drug product accelerated and/or stress studies on 
representative material (which may be pilot or laboratory scale rather 
than full scale)  
o Pre-and post -change comparability studies on representative material  
o Statistical evaluation of relevant data including existing stability studies  
o Predictive degradation and other empirical or first -principles kinetic 
model s 
o Utilisation of prior knowledge including  relevant company  knowledge 
and the scientific literature  
• Use of confirmatory stability studies post -change instead of submission of data 
as part of a regulatory change submission 
Where applicable,  a commitment to initiate or complete ongoing, long -term stability 
testing on post -change batches can assure that the approved shelf life and storage 
conditions continue to be applicable after implementing the CMC change.  
10 GLOSSARY  
Term  Definition  
CAPA  Corrective Action and Preventive Action  – 
System that focuses on investigating, 
understanding, and correcting discrepancies 
while attempting to prevent their occurrence  
CMO  Contract Manufacturing Organisation  
CPP Critical Process Parameter – process parameter 
whose variability has an impact on a critical 
quality attribute and therefore should be 
monitored or controlled to assure the process 
produces the desired product quality. (Q8 (R2)) 
CQA  Critical Quality Attrib ute – a physical, 
chemical, biological or microbiological 
property or characteristic that should be within 
an appropriate limit, range, or distribution to 
assure the desired product quality. (Q8( R2)) 
CTD  Common Technical Document  
Company  Manufacturing si tes and MAH where relevant  
EC Established Condition  
MAA  Marketing Authorisation Application  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
23 
 Term  Definition  
MAH  Marketing Authorisation Holder  
Notification  A change to an approved established condition 
that does not require approval prior to 
implementation.  
PACMP  Post-Approval Change Management P rotocol  
PLCM  Product Lifecycle Management  
Post-approval CMC commitment  Commitment by the MAH to undertake 
specific CMC activities to be implemented 
during the commercial phase.  
Prior  approval  Change to an approved established condition 
that requires regulatory review and approval 
prior to implementation   
PQR Product Quality Review – regular periodic 
review of API or drug products with the 
objective to verify process consistency, to 
highlight any trends and to identify product 
and process improvements  
PQS Pharmaceutical Quality System  
QRM  Quality Risk Management  
Submission  Communication to a regulatory authority 
regarding a change to an established condition 
that could be prior  approval or notification.  
 
11 REFERENCES  
ICH M4: The CTD -- Quality  
ICH Q1A(R2) Stability Testing of New Drug Substances and Products  
ICH Q2(R1) Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and Methodology  
ICH Q5E Comparability of Biotechnological/Biological Products Subject to Changes 
in Their Manufacturing Process  
ICH Q8(R2) Pharmaceutical Development  
ICH Q9 Quality Risk Management  
ICH Q10 Pharmaceutical Quality System  
ICH Q11 Development and Manufacture of Drug Substances  
ICH Q8, Q9, and Q10 Questions and Answers  
ICH Q8, Q9, & Q10 Quest ions and Answers -- Appendix: Q&As from Training Sessions 
(Q8, Q9, & Q10 Points to Consider)  

 
24 
 APPENDIX 1:  CTD  SECTIONS THAT CONTAIN ECS 
Notes:  
• This table does not contain a complete list of ECs for a product.  The intention of the table is to provide general guidance about the 
elements of manufacture and control that constitute ECs  and their location within the CTD structure. 
• White rows indicate CTD sections where ECs  are generally located.  Grey r ows indicate CTD sections where supportive information 
is generally located.  
• CTD sections containing ECs may also contain elements of supportive information.   
• For information  related to the drug delivery system for a drug -device combination product , the location or the relevant content within 
the CTD structure may vary depending on the design of the particular product and region.  
CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
3.2.S  DRUG SUBSTANCE  
3.2.S.1  General Information  
 
3.2.S.1.1  Nomenclature   
Drug Substance Name, Structure.  
 3.2.S.1.2  Structure  
3.2.S.1.3  General properties  Supportive information  
 
3.2.S.2  Manufacture  
3.2.S.2.1  Manufacturer(s)  Drug Substance Manufacturing Site(s) (including testing)  
 
3.2.S.2.2  Description of manufacturing  
process and process controls  Individual unit operations and their sequence in the manufacturing process   
 
For levels/details of ECs  for inputs (process parameters  and material attributes ) and outputs of individual unit operations , 
reference is made to Chapter 3, section 3.2.3.1  – Identification of ECs for the Manufacturing Processes    
3.2.S.2.3  Control of Materials  Starting material specifications (test, elements of analytical procedure and acceptance criteria)  
Raw material/reagent/solvent critical controls  
  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
25 
 CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
Source of materials (e.g. , cell and seed source, raw materials) and control of critical materials of biological origin  
Generation and control of Master  - Working Cell Bank / Master  - Working Seed Lot, etc. ( Applicable to 
biotechnological/biological products)   
3.2.S.2.4  Control of critical steps and 
intermediates  Specifications (e.g. , test, elements of analytical procedure and acceptance criteria) for critical steps and intermediates  which 
may include storage conditions of critical intermediates   
 
3.2.S.2.5  Process validation and/or 
evaluation   
Supportive information 
 
3.2.S.2.6  Manufacturing process 
development  Supportive information 
3.2.S.3  Characterisation  Supportive information  
3.2.S.3.1  
 
3.2.S.3.2  Elucidation of structure and 
other characteristics  
Impurities   
Supportive information 
 
3.2.S.4  Control of Drug Substance  
3.2.S.4.1  Specification  Drug Substance Specification  
For each Quality Attribute on the specification  
• Test Method  
• Acceptance Criteria  
3.2.S.4.2  Analytical Procedures  Reference is made to Chapter 3, section 3.2.3.2  Identification of  ECs for Analytical Procedures  
3.2.S.4.3  Validation of analytical 
procedure  Supportive information  
3.2.S.4.4  Batch analyses  Supportive information  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
26 
 CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
3.2.S.4.5  Justification of specification  Supportive information 
3.2.S.5  Reference Material  Reference Material  specification (e.g., test, elements of analytical procedure , where appropriate,  and acceptance criteria)  
 
 
3.2.S.6  Container Closure  Material of construction and specification   
3.2.S.7  Stability  
3.2.S.7.1  Stability Summary and 
Conclusions  Drug Substance storage conditions and shelf -life (or Retest period for chemicals)  
3.2.S.7.2  Post-approval stability protocol 
and stability commitments   
Supportive information (also see Chapter 3, section 3.2.2 ) 
 
3.2.S.7.3  Stability data  Supportive information 
3.2.P  DRUG PRODUCT  
3.2.P.1  Description and Composition of 
Drug Product  Drug Product qualitative and quantitative composition  
3.2.P.2  Pharmaceutical development  
3.2.P.2.1  Components of the drug 
product   
 
 
 
 
Supportive  information  3.2.P.2.2  Drug product  
3.2.P.2.3  Manufacturing process 
development  
3.2.P.2.4  Container closure system  
3.2.P.2.5  Microbiological attributes  
3.3.P.2.6  Compatibility  
3.2.P.3  Manufacture  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
27 
 CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
3.2.P.3.1  Manufacturer(s)  Drug Product Manufacturing sites (including  those for  testing , primary and secondary packaging , device assembly for drug 
product -device combination products  
3.2.P.3.2  Batch Formula  Drug Product Batch Formula (Qualitative and Quantitative)  
3.2.P.3.3  Description of manufacturing 
process and process controls  Individual unit operations and their sequence in the manufacturing process  
For levels/details of ECs for inputs  (process parameters  and material attributes ) and outputs of individual unit operations , 
reference is made to Chapter 3, section 3.2.3.1   
3.2.P.3.4  Controls of Critical Steps and 
Intermediates  Specifications (e.g. , test, elements of analytical procedure and acceptance criteria) for critical steps and intermediates which 
may include storage conditions of critical intermediates.   
3.2.P.3.5  Process validation and/or 
evaluation   
Supportive information 
 
3.2.P.4  Control of Excipients  
3.2.P.4.1  Specifications  
 
 Excipient Specification  
For each Quality Attribute on the specification  
 
• Test Method  
• Acceptance Criteria  
 
Or, if applicable,  
 
Reference to pharmacopoeial monograph  
3.2.P.4.2  Analytical Procedures  Reference to pharmacopoeial monograph and if none exists, refer to Chapter 3, section 3.2.3.2   
3.2.P.4.3  Validation of analytical 
procedures  
Supportive information 
 3.2.P.4.4  Justification of specifications  
Supportive information 
3.2.P.4.5  Excipients of Human or Animal 
Origin  Excipient source and controls  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
28 
 CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
 3.2.P.4.6  Novel excipients  (If Novel Excipient Specification is not described in 3.2.P.4.1)  
Novel Excipient Specification  
 
For each Quality Attribute on the specification  
 
• Test Method   
• Acceptance Criteria  
3.2.P.5  Control of Drug Product  
3.2.P.5.1  Specification(s)  Drug Product Specification  
For each Quality Attribute on the specification  
• Test Method   
• Acceptance Criteria   
 
3.2.P.5.2  Analytical Procedures  Reference is made to Chapter 3, section 3.2.3.2   
3.2.P.5.3  Validation of analytical 
procedures   
 
Supportive information 
 
 
3.3.P.5.4  Batch analyses  
Supportive information 3.2.P.5.5  Characterisation of impurities  
 3.2.P.5.6  Justification of specification(s)  
3.2.P.6  Reference Materials  Reference material specification  (e.g., test, elements of analytical procedure , where appropriate,  and acceptance criteria)  
 
3.2.P.7  Container Closure System  Material of construction and specification  
Where applicable, supplier/manufacturer of primary container closure system  
3.2.P.8  Stability  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
29 
 CTD 
SECTION  SECTION TITLE  ESTABLISHED CONDITIONS – General List with notes  
 
3.2.P.8.1  Stability Summary and 
Conclusion  Drug product storage conditions and shelf -life Where applicable, in -use storage conditions and shelf -life 
3.2.P.8.2  Post-approval stability protocol 
and stability commitment   
 
Supportive information (also see Chapter 3, section 3.2.2 ) 
 
 
3.3 P.8.3  Stability data  Supportive information  
3.2.A  APPENDICES  
3.2.A.1  Facilities and equipment  Regional regulation and guidance apply  
3.2.A.2  Adventitious agents safety 
evaluation  Supportive information (Applicable to biotechnological/biological products)   
3.2.A.3  Excipients  Supportive information  
3.2.R  REGIONAL INFORMATION  
 Not Applicable  Regional regulation and guidance apply.  
 
 
 

 
30 
 APPENDIX 2:  PRINCIPLES OF CHANGE MANAGEMENT  
Consistent with the basic requirements of ICH Q10, an effective change management 
system support s the principle s of this guideline  and is described below : 
1. Captures stimuli for change , including those that can improve product performance 
or process robustness ; 
2. Ensures full understanding of the scope of the change and its implications for all 
aspects of the process and control strategy including the impact on ECs  and aspects 
that are not  ECs  in affected marketing authorisations;  
3. Leverages existing process performance and product quality knowledge;  
4. Requires science- based risk management  and risk categorisation of the intended 
change; considers the potential impact if  the intended  change i s not implemented; 
5. Determines data (existing and/or to be newly generated) needed to support the 
change and accordingly  develop s study protocols describing the methods, 
prospective acceptance criteria as well as additional post-implementation process 
perfo rmance and/or product quality monitoring as necessary ; 
6. Ensures that a n appropriate  regulatory submission is  filed when required;  
7. Uses  a defined change control process to approve or reject the intended change and  
involve  appropriate stakeholders, including but not restricted to Manufacturing, 
Quality , and Regulatory  Affairs  personnel;  
8. Ensures implementation of the change is based on:  
a. Review that the change as implemented remains aligned with the relevant 
study protocols, PLCM document , or PACMP;  
b. Assessment of data generated to demonstrate that the change objective and 
acceptance criteria were met ;  
9. Ensures that risk- mitigating steps are developed in the case of deviations from 
acceptance criteria, or identification of unanticipated risks; 
10. Verifies, post -implementation, that relevant changes have been effective in 
achieving the desired outcome with no unintended consequences for product 
quality ; 
If deviations associated with post -approval changes are detected, ensures that the 
issue is managed via the company ’s deviation management process and appropriate 
corrective and/or preventive actions are identified and undertaken via the 
company ’s corrective and preventive action (CAPA) system ; 
11. Post-implementation :  
a. Captures new product/process knowledge gained during implementation of 
the change;  

ICH Q12 Guideline  
 
31 
 b. Where applicable, ensures that regulatory filings are updated , and an 
assessment is made as to whether updates to the PLCM document are 
needed ; 
c. Where applicable, ensures that the change is included and assessed as part  
of the Product Quality Review (PQR) ;   
12. The change management system should be  available for  review during 
audit/ inspection. 
Use of Knowledge in Change Management  
An effective change management system includes active knowledge management, in 
which information from multiple sources is integrated to identify stimuli for changes 
needed to improve product and/or process robustness.  The connection between knowledge 
mana gement and change management is illustrated in Figure 2.  These sources can include, 
but are not limited to, developmental studies, process understanding documents, product 
or process trending, and product -specific CAPA outcomes.  Provisions should be made  for 
sharing knowledge  (e.g., in quality agreements and/or contracts)  that relates  to product and 
process robustness or otherwise informs changes  between the MAH and relevant 
manufacturing stakeholders ( research and development  organisations , manufactur ers, 
CMOs, suppliers, etc.) . 
In addition to individual sources of information, there should be a mechanism to provide a 
holistic view of quality performance for a specific product or product family on a regular 
basis, as captured in the product quality review  (PQR) and shown in Figure 2.  This should 
include steps taken to identify and manage sources of variability , which allows for the 
identification of further need for change not apparent when the data are viewed in isolation.     
As described in  ICH Quality Implementation Working Group on Q8, Q9, and Q10 
Questions & Answers , there is no added regulatory requirement for a formal knowledge 
management system.  
Manage ment Review  
In addition to the guidance provided in ICH Q10 regarding  an effective change 
management system, the following should be considered in the Management Review:  
• Monitoring the timeliness of the change management system to assure  that changes 
are implemented in a timely manner commensurate with the criticality/ urgency 
identified for the change .  When implementation is delayed, an assessment and 
mitigation of any risks associated with the delay  should be made ; 
• Monitoring the performance of the change management system, such as assessing 
the frequency of intended chang es that are not approved for implementation by 
the quality unit ;  
• Ensuring that post -implementation verification occurs and reviewing the results of 
that verification as a measure of change management effectiveness (e.g. , to identify 
improvements to the change management system) . 

