24 Journal for Clinical Studies 
Volume 11 Issue 3Market Report
How Engaging Patients in Trial Design 
Maximises Orphan Drug Success
Orphan drug discovery is characterised both by extraordinary 
opportunities and challenges. The potential to affect the 
course of medicine is every bit as significant as the promise 
of changing the lives of people who suffer from lifelong, 
debilitating conditions. 
Yet, research in this space is also associated with some of the 
highest hurdles in medicine. Orphan drugs, by their very nature, 
treat small, complex patient populations. Thus, clinical trial design 
and execution require a level of scientific expertise, operational 
acumen, regulatory knowledge, and patient engagement skills that 
many sponsors find daunting. Indeed, algorithms have been created 
just to assist in the selection of appropriate alternate trial design, 
given the emphasis placed upon maximising patient exposure 
and reducing the overall timeline for development prior to market 
authorisation or NDA submission.1
Fortunately, regulatory flexibility and financial incentives can 
help build a strong business case for conducting orphan drug trials, 
in the context of exceptionally innovative clinical development 
programmes. Amid a scarcity of research resources, the US Food 
and Drug Administration (FDA), European Medicines Agency 
(EMA), and others apply special considerations to rare disease trials. 
Notably, a study published by the National Organization for Rare 
Diseases affirms the effectiveness of programmes like the Orphan 
Drug Act of 1983 and reinforces the need for continued flexibility, 
which has been demonstrated from the FDA.2,3
Backed by a friendly financial and regulatory framework, 
sponsors can participate in orphan drug research with greater 
confidence. The key to a successful outcome, however, is to engage 
patients and advocacy groups at a deeper, more personal level. Even 
the language typically used must change: It is not enough to “recruit” 
or “retain” patients for an orphan drug trial, we must “engage” 
them in the process of programme design and the articulation of 
benefits and risks. A successful orphan drug programme is all about 
understanding not only the clinical disease at hand but also how 
patients and their families experience the illness in their daily lives. 
Orphan Drug Discovery:  
Recognise the Inherent Nuances and Challenges
The journey for a patient with an orphan disease is often marred 
with frustrations and setbacks. It’s not uncommon for patients to 
spend years seeing multiple specialists before they even receive a 
diagnosis. Once a rare disease is identified, a patient’s entire life 
may revolve around trying to find a cure, all while managing any 
functional limitations that may accrue.
Small patient populations coupled with significant clinical 
heterogeneity and complex lifestyles and disease dynamics make 
patient engagement particularly challenging. That’s why it’s vital 
that sponsors first understand their patient population – how 
they live and the far-reaching impact of their illness on both the 
individual and family – in order to create an informed research and 
clinical development programme. The second step is to design a trial that reflects the knowledge 
of what patients and families are up against, i.e., a protocol 
structure based upon visit frequency or visit density (the number 
of assessments/visits) and the need for specialised testing, which is 
consistent with ongoing standards of care. Protocols must account 
for highly diverse clinical manifestations and disease progression, 
as well as accommodate patients and families who live complicated, 
demanding lives.
This factor alone requires a level of finesse and expertise not 
typically found in clinical trials for more common conditions, with 
more traditional development programmes. It also requires a higher 
level of collaboration and engagement with families and advocacy 
groups at an earlier phase of research. It’s important not to overlook that 
patients with rare diseases are often part of close-knit communities. 
Both positive and negative information about a product’s attributes 
or an ongoing clinical trial can spread rapidly across these patient 
populations, and sponsors who hope to engage the right participants 
must develop a level of trust that results in widespread endorsement 
with information that is both timely and accurate.
Elements of a Patient-Centric Trial Design
Because the success of orphan drug research is intrinsically connected 
to the right participant engagement strategies, sponsors should 
prioritise a patient-centric trial design that considers the following 
elements:    
• Collaboration with advocacy groups
More than 7000 rare diseases exist, which makes it nearly 
impossible for sponsors or contract research organisations 
(CROs) to be experts on all of them. Indeed, the most laudable 
skills are those that are fungible across diverse indications, 
which permits adaptation to one indication based upon the 
experience of evaluating another. That’s why collaboration 
with advocacy groups from the outset – even before protocol 
design – is imperative to understanding the patient journey 
connected to a particular illness and identifying appropriate end 
points. In fact, without buy-in from these groups, it’s very hard 
to conduct a successful orphan drug trial as either the design 
or other pragmatic constraints of study enrolment limit patient 
participation.
Keep in mind, however, that not all advocacy groups will be 
quick to endorse a trial, and their purpose may differ markedly 
as a reflection of their primary focus. When there are numerous 
groups to choose from representing a particular orphan disease, 
sponsors and CROs must determine the main players and then 
build genuine relationships that can help establish trust across 
the continuum of development.
• Branding that captures the patients’ voice
Once partnered with the right organisations, sponsors and 
CROs can collaboratively brand a study in a way that reflects 
the patients’ voice. Patients and families are much more likely 
to respond positively when all education and communication is 
consistent and familiar and when they feel like their experience 
and input matter. 

Journal for Clinical Studies  25
www.jforcs.com
Market Report
• Support for patients
Daily life for patients with rare diseases may be very 
draining, with multiple comorbidities, and families are often 
overwhelmed with the tasks involved in managing the illness 
within the framework of regular life responsibilities. Sponsors 
who implement support services are much more likely to 
engage patients and families for the long term. Some of these 
services may include:
• Transportation and travel.  These are huge factors for 
many patients. Limited patient numbers often necessitate 
a global approach to orphan drug research, and patients 
may be spread across large geographical territories. 
In one study involving a rare metabolic disturbance, 
for example, a patient flew across 11 time zones every 
two weeks. Without assistance from the sponsor and 
the supporting CRO, the travel challenge likely would 
have meant the patient could not participate. This one 
example also emphasises the importance of linking 
experimental design with the pragmatism associated 
with clinical operations because they are intrinsically 
the same consideration.• Visit frequency and density.  Establishing home nursing 
visits can ease travel burdens by decreasing the number 
of site visits required, especially if the study requires 
many site visits or the patient has compromised mobility. 
Many assessments can be done in the patient’s home by 
skilled and protocol-trained nurses. These assessments 
can include abbreviated physical examination, adverse 
event and concomitant medication recording, CSSRS 
questionnaire, abbreviated neurology examination, ECG 
recording, blood draw, IMP compliance, multiple quality-
of-life and neurological function assessments, and more. 
When patients do travel, it’s imperative to make maximum 
use of site time by scheduling as many specialist meetings 
as possible at each visit without overwhelming the patient. 
Indeed, recent trends within the industry showcase the 
potential value of “at home” versus “within clinic” as 
sessments, with responsibilities parsed based upon the 
competency of home versus clinic personnel.4
• Sibling and pet care.  The impact of disease burden and 
study burden on the entire family must be considered. 
Ensuring care for siblings or pets during a trial may 
make it possible for families to participate and to do 
so relatively unencumbered regarding concerns about 
family members.  
• Ongoing communication. Keeping patients and families 
educated and engaged requires ongoing communication, 
both to build interest and to ensure all their needs are 
met. Online portals offer an effective means for easing 
and centralising communication. In addition, regular 
communication through email or text can enhance 
satisfaction by reminding patients about appointments, 
what they need to bring, or just simply what to expect. 
Managing the communication process is critically 
important during studies conducted under GCP (Good 
Clinical Practice), given the oversight mandated for study 
participants. 
26 Journal for Clinical Studies 
Volume 11 Issue 3
Barbara Zupancic
Barbara Zupancic is senior director of patient 
recruitment and retention at Worldwide 
Clinical Trials. With nearly 20 years of 
experience in clinical research, she is 
responsible for the patient engagement aspects 
of clinical trials, which includes making trials more accessible to 
patients, less burdensome for sites, and smoother for sponsors.
Email: barbara.zupancic@worldwide.com
Dr Michael Murphy
Dr Michael Murphy is chief medical and 
scientific officer at Worldwide Clinical Trials. 
With 30 years of pharmaceutical experience, 
he is responsible for enabling strategic 
clinical research consultation and protocol 
development services for Phases I–IV, across therapeutic areas 
within Worldwide Clinical Trials.
Email: michael.murphy@worldwide.com
Market Report
• Support for clinical sites 
An online portal to help support each site – complete with 
training, study protocols, education resources and contact 
points – is a critical part of this equation, as well. Branded 
materials, pocket protocols, lunch-and-learn materials, 
referral letters, and other resources can ease the participation 
burden for sites. 
Capture All the Benefits of Orphan Trials
In the US and elsewhere, administrative flexibilities that reduce 
timelines and costs for orphan drug studies can lower the development 
risk for sponsors. Tax credits and other financial incentives enhance 
the attractiveness.5 Consider, for example, that simply acquiring an 
orphan designation can increase a public company’s valuation by 3-10 
per cent, contingent upon the size of the organisation, in the portfolio 
on the development.6
Partnering with a CRO experienced in innovative approaches to 
orphan drug trials can help sponsors achieve timely, effective results. 
The innovation extends from methods of regulatory interface, the 
innovative portfolio of experimental designs that could be considered, 
the operational acumen that must be specifically tailored toward 
project execution, and the overarching need to embed patient-
centricity into a formal clinical development process. When a patient-
centric trial design complements an already attractive regulatory 
outlook, opportunity abounds. Rare disease research presents a strong 
business case for advancing medical practice and improving the lives 
of some of healthcare’s most disadvantaged patients by maximally 
exploiting advances in research and development and in clinical trial 
methodology. It’s an important mission for healthcare, and one that is 
ripe for future expansion.
REFERENCE
1.  https:/ /ojrd.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/1750-1172-8-48, visited on 
31 Jan 2019.
2. https:/ /www.fdanews.com/ext/resources/files/archives/n/
NORDstudyofFDAapprovaloforphandrugs111611.pdf, visited on 31 Jan 2019.
3. https:/ /www.fda.gov/ForIndustry/DevelopingProductsforRare  
DiseasesConditions/HowtoapplyforOrphanProductDesignation/
ucm364750.htm, visited on 31 Jan 2019.
4.  https:/ /www.clinicaltrialsarena.com/comment/home-based-clinical-
studies-a-paradigm-shift-6094192-2/, visited on 6 Feb 2019.
5.  http:/ /www.ojrd.com/content/3/1/33, visited on 31 Jan 2019.
6.  https:/ /ojrd.biomedcentral.com/articles/10.1186/s13023-017-0665-6, 
visited on 6 Feb 2019.