1 
 PharmaSUG 2017 -  Paper PO24  
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives  
Renuka Tammisetti and Karthika Bhavadas, PRA Health Sciences  
 
ABSTRACT   
The ICH -E3 guidelines require patient narratives, which are targeted patient profiles of clinical 
importance.  Patient narratives describe death, other serious adverse events, and certain other significant 
adverse events judged to be of special interest collected for a subject over the course of a clinical trial.  
The SAS programmer is expected to provide key data information to the medical writer.  The Medical 
writer will review patient profiles to coincide with an event of interest and address the safety concerns of interest at the patient level.  This  paper will provide helpful insight on the traditional process of  narrative 
generation; identify the requirements  and gather information to program narratives.  
INTRODUCTION  
Patient narratives form an important part of  clinical study reporting.  It provides  chronological account of 
all the events encountered by a subject during or immediately following a clinical trial.  The regulatory 
submissions would require narratives not only for serious adverse events (SAEs), but also for events causing death or study discontinuation.  Patient narratives are a part of safety data submitted to the  
regularity  authorities  for all phases of clinical trial s.  It involves review of patient profiles, data listings, and 
other information followed by manual wr iting of narratives as plain text . 
 
According to ICH-E3 tripartite guideline on the Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports (CSRs) 
(Section 12.3.2) , a patient safety narrative should describe:  
• The nature, intensity and outcome of the event.  
• Clinical course leading to the event.  
• Timing relevant to study drug administration.  
• Relev ant laboratory measures.  
• Action taken with the study drug (and timing) in relation to the event . 
• Treatment or intervention.  
• Autopsy  findings (if applicable).  
• Investigator’s and sponsor’s opinion on causality.  
 
Patient narratives should also include followi ng data to get a meaningful outcome:  
 
• Patient Identifier.  
• Age and sex of patient.  
• General clinical condition of patient with duration of illness . 
• Relevant medical history.  
• Disease being treated.  
• Relevant concomitant and prior medications with details of dosage.  
• Investigational drug administered.  
• Dose and duration of investigational drug administered.  
 
 
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives , continued  
 
 
2 
 NARRATIVE GENERATION  
The SAS programmer plays a significant role in the creation of patient narratives.  Medical writer requests 
a programmer to provide key information of all the significant events  of a clinical trial, which can be in the 
form of listings or datasets based on their requirements.   Narratives can be written for both unlocked and 
locked clinical database.  Production of patient narratives as per  reviewers’ requirements can be quite 
challenging, considering variety of data that needs to be gathered from various datasets and shifting 
demands of the reviewer.  
 
Display  1: Flow chart representing basic steps followed by a programmer to create a narrat ive 
report.  
 
  
Gather Information from Analysis datasets
 
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
A narrative provides the complete story of an event chronologically and holds together relevant 
information from various sources liaising with medical experts.  Since narrative wr iting involves 
expressing the messages clearly and effectively , the m edical write r uses various data sources like CRF 
pages, analysis datasets, pharmacovigilance database , clinical database listings  etc., to provide a 
template based on the project requirem ents.  In most cases, a medical writer references listings or tables 
from the project while creating the template. Medical advisors review the final narrative template created 
by Medical writers.  Narrative template and datasets may vary based on the therapeutic area and 
investigational drug.   Identifying medical history and laboratory result s ‘relevant’  to the event of interest 
can be challenging.  
 After receiving the template from medical writer, the programmer should ensure that the information in the 
template is available in the study  database to avoid road blocks while programming.   The programmer 
needs to incorporate different data from various domains such as Demographics, Adverse Events, Laboratory data, Medical History, Concomitant Medications, Exposure, etc. for each subject.  
 
 Final validated 
programmed 
narratives to Medical 
Writer  
Gather Information 
from Datasets  Development of  
Programming Code for 
Input Narrative Dataset  
  
Output  
Programed 
Narrative 
 Narrative 
template by 
Medical 
Writer  
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives , continued  
 
 
3 
 The patient narrative template is designed to deliver reports  at the subject level .  Generating individual 
reports could be time consuming and labor intensive.  Most of the pharmaceutical companies and CROs 
have developed st andard macros to ease the process and reduce the repetitive work  across different  
projects.  
 
Display  2:  Sample of Narrative T emplate  
Protocol :  
Subject :  
Assigned Treatment Group :  
Race/Ethnicity/Gender :  
Age at Screening : xx Years  
Enrollment Date : DDMMYYYY  
Randomization Date : DDMMYYYY  
Date Study Drug First Administered : DDMMYYYY  
Date Study Drug Last Administered : DDMMYYYY  
 
Events  Meeting  Narrative  Writing  Criteria  
Reasona 
 MedDRA PT  
(Verbatim)  Onset Date  
(Day)/Periodp End Date  
(Day)  CTCAEb; 
Related Outcomec; 
Actiond SAE 
       
       
       
a: Death; SAE=serious adverse event; PTAE=premature termination of treatment due to adverse event; 
PSAE=premature  termination of study  due to adverse event;  EOI=Event  of Interest  
b: Standard Toxicity  Grad e 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 
c: res=recovered/resolved; res seq=recovered/resolved with sequelae; not res=not recovered/not resolved; fatal;  unk=unknown  
d: dos wthdr=Drug withdrawn;  dos del=dose delayed;  dos no chg=Dose not changed;  unk=unknown 
p: CHE=Chemotherapy  run-in period;  NEO=Neoadjuvant  period;  ADJ=Adjuvant  period 
Relevant Past Medical History :  
Relevant Prior Medications/Supplements/Therapies :  
Relevant Concomitant Medications/Supplements/Therapies:  
Ongoing Medications History :   (Listing xxxx Medical Histo ry) 
[MHDECOD]  
[MHDECOD]  
Study Drug Treatment : The patient entered the XYZ study (protocol number ), a multicenter, prospective, observational registry 
study and received the first xxx injection xx study days later into the study . 
Description of Event(s), Including Follow -up: 
The patient experienced [AESEV=grade or severity]  [AEDECOD preferred term bolded () on Study Day xx , [AESDY]  xx days after 
the most recent previous Ozurdex injection. The event was classified as a/an [NREAS, NREAS, etc]   eg, SAE, PTAE,  PSAE, and 
OSE  (list all categories met by event and modify sentence accordingly; note the use of serial commas) . 
Laboratory Results : 
Parameter  Date (day)  Visit  Result  CTC 
Toxicity  Indicator  Range  
Lower Limit  Range  
Upper Limit  
 
 
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives , continued  
 
 
4 
 The header section of the narrative ( Display  2) provides the demographic details of a subject.  From a 
programmers’ perspective, we obtain this information from the demographics dataset (DM or ADSL).   
Events of interest are provided in a chronological order  along with pas t medical history, concomitant 
medications, study drug treatment, and other relevant information.  The adverse event dataset plays a 
vital role in the narrative generation since it provides all the events occurring during the conduct of the 
trial.  Relevant laboratory  results  during the event a re also provided in the narrative.  
 
PROGRAMMING CHALLENG ES: 
A key issue to consider while transforming analysis datasets to narrative datasets is how to handle one or 
many contributing dat a points contained in the analysis datasets, such as adverse events and 
concomitant medications.   If the dataset is not clean and patient safety narratives are written prior to 
database lock, updates are required based on the final database lock data. This  approach can be time 
consum ing than preparing all narratives after database lock .  This process is feasible for projects with a 
large number of narratives required to be drafted in a short span .  
 
Due to the descriptive nature of the report, programming t he narrative dataset is driven based on high 
content.  Hence, working through formats, indention, embedded data, text that needs to be included in the 
narrative dataset can be challenging and intensive.   As analysis datasets contain information at an event  
level parsing over m ultiple rows for medical history and concomitant medications , a programmer has to 
reformat and concatenat e multiple rows into a single string.  This information is embedded into the text of 
a narrative sentence stored in a narrative dataset . 
  
Display  3: Sample Narrative Output for C oncomitant Medications:  
 
 
 
   
The subject’s relevant concomitant medications at the time of the event included  
Adoair250Diskus, Salbutamol, Flutide 200 Diskus, Sultanol Inhaler 100mcg, and Sultanol Inhaler  
100UG.  
  
Multiple rows of medical history concatenated with start dates are combined into a single string with 
delimiters.  The ODS line break instructions are used to list the terms in a single cell of the narrative 
document.  
  
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives , continued  
 
 
5 
 Display  4:  Sample Narrati ve Output for Medical History:  
Prior Medical History:  
 
   C/w undifferentiated pleomorphic sarcoma, unk  
   Cholecystectomy, unk  
   Glaucoma surgery, unk  
   Vocal cord benign nodule removed, unk  
   Tooth root fracture, unk -01Sep2015  
   Shortness of breath upon exertion, unk -02Sep2015  
   Spindle cell sarcoma, 19Jan2015-unk  
   Anemia, 03Sep2015-04Sep2015  
 
Generating a sample narrative output and having it checked by the Medical Writer to get a final approval 
for any updates or changes is much more viable tha n generating it for all the subjects meeting the criteria.  
 
CONSISTENCY  
Creating a narrative report from a draft narrative that is included in the clinical study report usually involves several review processes  such as medical writing, medical reviewers , and Quality Assurance to 
make sure all the information fit together and the narrative accurately represents data from the sources .  
As a programmer, while preparing a large number of patient safety narratives, it is essential that 
consistency is maintained throughout the project.  Hence, excel spreadsheets can be used as an 
excellent tracking tool for managing high volumes of safety narratives, which can be shared with the 
Medical Writer  on a regular basis . 
 
CONCLUSION 
Patient narratives have become an integral part of the data cleansing and review for the clinical trials 
data.  Developing an automated narrative process with robust and reusable SAS -based macro application 
would result in saving a lot of hours , which can be repeated on multiple studies. The di scussion of the 
macro that we used is beyond the scope of this paper . 
 
REFERENCES  
1. ICH Harmonized Tripartite Guideline: Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports E3. Current 
Step 4 version dated 30 November 1995. Page 24.  
2. United States Food and Drug A dministration, "Guideline for the Format and Content of the 
Clinical and Statistical Sections of an Application", July 1988.  
 
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS  
The authors would like to thank the PRA Medical Writing team for providing insight and examples and also the 
Statistical Programming Management team for their support  and encouragement . 
 
A Guide to Programming Patient Narratives , continued  
 
 
6 
 CONTACT INFORMATION  
Your comments and questions are valued and encouraged.  Contact the author at:  
Renuka Tammisetti  
PRA Health Sciences  
731 Arbor Way, Suit e 100  
Blue Bell, PA 19422  
Email: itzrenuka@gmail.com  
 
 
Karthika Bhavadas  
PRA Health Sciences     
4130 Parklake Avenue,  
Raleigh, NC 27612  
Email: Karthika.bhavadas@gmail.com  
 
SAS and all other SAS Institute Inc. product or service names are registered trademarks or trademarks of 
SAS Institute Inc. in the USA and other countries. ® indicates USA  registration.  
Other brand and product names are trademarks of their r espective companies.