Course syllabus Fubas  73/2023 
University of Gothenburg 
DEPARTMENT OF MOLECULAR MEDICINE AND 
SURGERY 
K1F2980, Study Design in Clinical Research, 3 credits (hec) 
Studiedesign vid klinisk forskning, 3 högskolepoäng  
Third-cycle level / Forskarnivå  
 
 
Approval  
This syllabus was approved by the The Committee for Doctoral Education on 2023-11-13, and 
is valid from spring semester 2024. 
 
 
Responsible department  
Department of Molecular Medicine and Surgery, Faculty of Medicine  
 
Prerequisite courses, or equivalent  
No prerequisite courses, or equivalent, demanded for this course.   
 
Purpose & Intended learning outcomes  
Purpose  
The purpose of the course is to present an overview over study designs employed in clinical 
research, to explain why and how to write a study protocol, and to critically reflect on protocols’ 
content.  
The course is ideal for doctoral students that are going to conduct clinical research.  
Intended learning outcomes  
At the end of the course the students should be able to: 1) Independently plan and produce a 
study protocol, including a thorough methodological evaluation and choice of appropriate 
study design; 2) Critically reflect on other students' individual project work in a scientifically 
constructive way; 3) Interpret and critically evaluate scientific studies relevant to the course 
content.  
 
Course content  
1) Basic terms in epidemiology and clinical study design; 2) Measures of disease occurrence; 3) 
Observational studies, including cohort and case-control studies; 4) Systematic and random 
K1F2980 Study Design in Clinical Research, 3 higher education credits (hec) / Studiedesign vid klinisk forskning,
3 högskolepoäng
Third-cycle level / Forskarnivå

errors; 5) Experimental studies, including randomised clinical trials; 6) Quality of life in clinical 
research; 7) Screening and diagnosis in relation to clinical research. Throughout the course the 
students will work on an individual project (examination 1) for peer-review (examination 2) and 
the students will critically review and discuss relevant scientific articles (examination 3).  
 
Forms of teaching and learning  
Lectures, individual article review, group discussions, and homework tasks. The course focuses 
on active learning, i.e., putting knowledge into practice and critically reflecting upon the 
knowledge, rather than memorising facts. Therefore, much of the focus of the course is on the 
individual project where students are required to develop a full study protocol including several 
important aspects covered in the lectures, article reviews and group discussions. Students will 
peer-review each other's projects during the examination.  
 
Language of instruction  
The course is given in English  
 
Grading scale  
Pass (G) /Fail (U)  
 
Compulsory components & forms of assessment  
Compulsory components  
Compulsory attendance includes the scheduled lectures and seminars all held during the first 
week of the course. Absence will need to be replaced by individual assignments following 
discussion with the course co-ordinator, e.g., article reviews, with written or oral follow-up.  
Forms of assessment  
1) Individual project work: Develop a written comprehensive yet concise study protocol 
including several important aspects of study design discussed during the course; 2) Peer-review 
of other students' projects followed by oral presentation of their project and opposition of other 
students projects during the group examination; 3) Critically review scientific articles relevant to 
the course content and participate actively to the discussions. To pass the course the student 
should show that all intended learning outcomes have been reached.  
 
Course literature  
Mandatory:  
Kenneth J Rothman ""Epidemiology -an introduction"" (2012) Oxford University Press, USA.  
Scientific articles (handed out during course).  
 
Recommended:  
Fayers PM, Machin D. Quality of life: the assessment, analysis and reporting of patient- 
reported outcomes. John Wiley & Sons; 2015 Nov 23.  
K1F2980 Study Design in Clinical Research, 3 higher education credits (hec) / Studiedesign vid klinisk forskning,
3 högskolepoäng
Third-cycle level / Forskarnivå2/2

