Jumping into Statistics: 
Introduction to Study Design and 
Statistical Analysis for Medical 
Research Using JMP Pro 
Statistical Software
FALL 2022/SPRING 2023
DR. TERRIE VASILOPOULOS , DR. CYNDI GARVAN, 
& DR . PENNY REYNOLDS

Meet the Instructors
CYNTHIA GARVAN, PHD
Research Professor in 
AnesthesiologyPENNY REYNOLDS, PHD
Research Associate Professor in 
Anesthesiology and Orthopaedics 
and Rehabilitation
TERRIE VASILOPOULOS, PHD
Research Assistant Professor in 
Anesthesiology and Veterinary 
Medicine

Course Objectives
Review fundamentals of study design and 
research methodology
Understand how to choose best statistical test for 
your research question
Practice basic statistical analysis use JMP Pro 
Software

Course Topics
Life Cycle of Research and Asking a 
Good Research Question
Choosing the Right Study Design 
for Your Research
Clinical Trial Design
Populations, Samples, and 
Hypothesis Testing in Medical 
Research
Introduction to Data Types
Best Practices in Data Collection 
and Database Management: 
Getting Started with SAS JMP ProSummarizing and Visualizing Data
Statistical Methods and How to 
Choose Them
Risk Assessment Methods
Introduction to Regression and 
Correlation
Time -to-Event (Survival) Analysis
Methods for Clinical Diagnostic 
Testing

Choosing the 
Right Study Design 
for Your Research
9/21/2022

Learning Objectives
Participants will be able to:
1) Identify appropriate study designs for 
different type of research questions 
2) Distinguish between different levels of 
evidence 
3) Recognize threats to study validity and 
sources of bias

Why is this topic important?
It is truth we seek.

SYDNEY AGE 14 –Soccer or Dance Team?

Research Designs
Design
Explanatory
Experimental
 Observational
Researcher 
controls X
Researcher 
observes X
Descriptive
Catalog of 
experiences
(Case study is 
example)


Experimental Designs
•No control group
•Example: Pre-post design (Quality 
Improvement)
Pre-
experimental
•No randomization to intervention
•Example: Groups already exist -say patients at 
two hospitals.
Quasi -
experimental
•Control group
•Randomization to intervention
•Example: Randomized Control Trial
True 
experiment

Common study 
design types

Case Series and Case Reports
•Either collection of reports (same condition) or a report on a single patient
•Illustrate condition, treatment, reactions to treatment
•No study design


What kind of design is Case 
Report/Case Series?

Case Study and 
Series
A case study is a descriptive analysis of a single patient with a disease. A case series is a 
descriptive a nalysis of a series of people with the disease (there is no comparison group in 
case series). Case studies illustrate a condition, a treatment, and reactions to treatment.


Case Control Studies
•Patients with condition compared to those without
•Retrospective
•Relationship between condition and risk factor (odds ratio)
•Quick studies and good for rare diseases
•Less reliable than cohort or RCTs
•Not a direct measure of incidence


What kind of design is Case Control 
Study?

Case -control Study
A case -control study design is a study design that examines a group of people 
who have experienced an event (usually an adverse event) and a group of 
people who have not experienced the same event, and looks at how exposure to 
suspect (usually noxious) agents differed between the two groups. 
https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/us/toolkit/ebm -tools/a -glossary -of-ebm -terms

Cohort Studies
•Defined population (risk factor) 
followed over time
•Compared to group without risk 
factor
•Prospective, longitudinal, or historical 
retrospective•Relationship between risk factor and 
incidence of condition/disease 
(absolute/relative risk)
•Can provide evidence for causation
•Typically need large samples and time


What kind of design is a Cohort 
Study?

Cohort Study
A cohort study is a study design that follows a group of people, a cohort,  
prospectively in time, and then looks at how events differ among people within 
the group. A study that examines a cohort, which differs in respect to exposure to 
some suspected risk factor (e.g., smoking), is useful for trying to ascertain 
whether exposure is likely to cause specified events (e.g., lung cancer).
https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/us/toolkit/ebm -tools/a -glossary -of-ebm -terms

Cross -sectional Studies
•One point in time
•Quick studies
•Good way to estimate characteristics (such as risk or disease prevalence) in a population
•Can compare patients with condition to those without
•Cannot measure of incidence
Draw conclusionsTake histories

What kind of design is a Cross -
sectional  Study?

Cross -sectional 
Study
A cross -sectional study design is a study design that involves surveying a population 
about exposure, or condition, or both, at one point in time. It can be used for assessing 
the prevalence of a condition in the population. Cross -sectional studies should never be 
used for assessing causality of a treatment .
https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/us/toolkit/ebm -tools/a -glossary -of-ebm -terms

Randomized Control Trials
•Treatment group versus control groups
•Compare to placebo/standard treatment
•Patients randomly assigned to groups and followed; prospective
•Gold Standard
•Can have non -random trials (not as high level of evidence)


What kind of design is Randomized 
Control Trial?

Randomized Control 
Trials
A randomized control trial (RCT) in an experimental study design which participants are 
randomly assigned to two or more groups: at least one (the experimental group) 
receiving an intervention that is being tested and another (the comparison or control 
group) receiving an alternative treatment or placebo. This design allows assessment of 
the relative effects of interventions.
https://bestpractice.bmj.com/info/us/toolkit/ebm -tools/a -glossary -of-ebm -terms

Meta -analyses
•Combination of data from several studies 
•Pooled estimate of effects
•Not a review, involves statistical analysis
•High level of evidence
•Can be affected by publication bias
•Studies with little or no effects are often not published or less visible to 
the research community


Systematic Review
•Comprehensive survey of specific topic
•Unbiased synthesis of findings
•More rigorous than just a literature review
•Included published and unpublished work
•Formal process
•High level of evidence
•Systematic reviews qualitative


Comparing designs 
Let’s consider three goals that drive medical 
research:
1.Efficiency. Is the result obtained with minimal 
time, cost and resources (e.g., number of 
subjects required)?
2.Validity. Is the result likely to be true? (Internal 
validity)
3.Generalizability. Is the result widely applicable? 
(External validity)

Efficient Valid Generalizable
Case report/Case 
series
Case -control study
Cohort study
Randomized control 
trial (RCT)


Rules of Evidence to establish causality
that “X” causes “Y”
1.X is related to Y
2.X precedes Y
3.Other variables don’t explain Y

Validity and 
threats*
*Threats come from bias –there are 
many sources of bias!

Assessing Research Quality: Validity
•Validity is the soundness or rigor of a study.
•Research quality is the degree to which study 
measures and evaluates what it intended to.
•Internal validity is the extent to which a piece of 
evidence supports a claim about cause and effect, 
within the context of a particular study.
•External validity is the validity of applying the 
conclusions of a scientific study outside the context 
of that study. If a study has external validity it is said 
to be generalizable.

What are potential sources of bias in 
doing a valid history and physical on a 
patient undergoing elective surgery?
Linking to what you know 


Potential sources of bias in doing a 
valid history and physical on a patient 
undergoing elective surgery
•If the surgeon is doing the history and physical he 
would inherently concentrate only on his area of 
expertise. And he will often miss other physical signs 
and symptoms.
•The patient may lie about smoking history to appear 
more “socially acceptable.”
•Incomplete or inaccurate blood work may miss a 
diagnosis of diabetes in a patient.
•Incomplete or inaccurate self -report information due 
to a patient’s low literacy level.
•And many more


Major Types of Validity
Internal validity
◦Can we infer that differences in the outcome can be attributed 
to the exposure/intervention?
External validity
◦Can we infer that the relationship observed between variables 
is similar across different settings (generalizability)?
Statistical conclusion validity
◦Are conclusions from the research study founded in 
adequate/sound analysis of the data and interpretation of the 
results?


Threats to Validity
Name X is the focus variable –Y is the outcome
History Spurious event causes change in Y , not X
Testing Taking pre -test alters result of post -test
Maturation Changes occur in subjects not due to X
Instrumentation Measuring instrument changes during study or is unreliable
Selection •Study sample does not fairly represent population of interest
•Change in Y due to group differences at baseline
Regression to 
meanSubjects with extreme scores tend to score less extremely in 
subsequent testing
Mortality Loss of subjects from study connected to X

Placebo group
Reaction to interventionTreatment group
Follow -up 
testing
Name that bias!
Sample is 
randomized 
to treatment 
or placebo 
group


Math education study
•High school kids meet every Saturday during 
the school year for study session and pizza.
•Test scores significantly improve by the end of 
the year.
Is the Saturday Math Social an effective 
intervention?
Name that bias!



A RESEARCHER IS HAVING RECRUITMENT 
PROBLEMS WITH AN ANXIETY STUDY OF 
CHILDREN WHICH REQUIRES TAKING 
BLOOD SAMPLES. WHICH TYPE OF BIAS 
MAY BE AFFECTING THIS STUDY?
Name that bias!



Confounding
Confounding obscures the 'real' effect of an 
exposure on outcome.
To be a potential confounder of a “focus” variable 
X, a confounding variable Z must: 
1)have an association with the outcome Y
2)have an association with X
3)not be an effect of X

A
AB
BCan you identify a problem in this design? 
Windows of 
greenhouse
Ais one type of fertilizer, Bis another type of fertilizer. 
Which one is better?

True experimental design (e.g., RCT) 
controls for most, but not all, 
threats.
KEY POINT

A few basic ways to reduce bias
Sampling : Ensure your sample is representative of the population 
you are interested in studying.
Randomization : Ensure a rigorous randomization scheme.
Blinding : A technique which reduces sources of participant and 
research bias.
1.Single blinded : participant cannot figure out his assignment
2.Double blinded : neither participant nor research observer can figure 
out participant assignment
3.Triple blinded : participant, research observer, and data analyst can not 
figure out participant assignment
For more detail, please see: Pannucci , C.J. and Wilkins, E.G., 2010. 
Identifying and avoiding bias in research. Plastic and 
reconstructive surgery, 126(2), p.619.

Levels of evidence

The notion of quality of evidence or 
level of evidence is based on the 
premise that multiple studies which 
are rigorously reviewed through meta -
analysis and systematic reviews 
provide the highest overall quality of 
evidence to inform clinical practice. 
https://ncu.libguides.com/researchprocess/systematicreviews
At each level, 
quality depends 
on the quality of 
the levels below.

Randomized 
Control Trials
Cohort Studies
Case Control Studies
Case Reports/Case Series
Expert Opinions, Editorials
Animal and Laboratory StudiesLevels of Evidence for Study Designs
Quality of EvidenceSystematic Reviews & Meta Analysis
REALLY???

How was AIDS discovered?

The HIV/AIDS epidemic was revealed 
through a case series published in the 
Lancet in 1981 (and other such studies).
Bottom line: CASE STUDIES AND CASE SERIES ARE IMPORTANT!



Wrong results from clinical trials occur because of (1) 
mistakes by researchers in the planning and execution of 
clinical trials, (2) the complex and inexact nature of 
information researchers require and (3) factors that are 
beyond the control of the researcher. Chapter 7 in “It’s 
Great, Oops, No It Isn’t”  examines the last element and 
identifies seven fatal flaws that are inherent in the 
methodology of clinical trial.

Factors that are beyond the control of 
the researcher
1.The unknown population
2.The imperfect sample
3.The unequal treatment groups
4.The uncontrolled experimental setting
5.The breakdown of blinding
6.The impractical result
7.The insufficient sample size

Reporting 
Guidelines


Background of Equator Network
Enhancing the QUAlity and Transparency 
Of health Research
The EQUATOR Network is an “umbrella” organisation that brings 
together researchers, medical journal editors, peer reviewers, developers 
of reporting guidelines, research funding bodies and other collaborators 
with mutual interest in improving the quality of research publications and 
of research itself.


-




Summary Tips
Understand study types
Be aware of threats to validity
Familiarize yourself with reporting guidelines  
(https:// www.equator -network.org/reporting -guidelines)



References
Gauch R. It’s Great! Oops, No It Isn’t: Why Clinical Research Can’t Guarantee The 
Right Medical Answers. Springer Science & Business Media; 2008 Oct 26 .
Jager KJ, Zoccali C, Macleod A, Dekker FW. Confounding: what it is and how to 
deal with it. Kidney international. 2008 Feb 1;73(3):256 -60.
Mara CA, Peugh JL. Validity of Data Collected from Randomized Behavioral 
Clinical Trials During the COVID -19 Pandemic. J Pediatr Psychol. 2020 Oct 
1;45(9):971 -976. doi: 10.1093/ jpepsy /jsaa078. PMID: 32968774; PMCID: 
PMC7797740 .
Pannucci , C.J. and Wilkins, E.G., 2010. Identifying and avoiding bias in 
research. Plastic and reconstructive surgery, 126(2), p.619.

