 
International Council for Harmonisation of Technical Requirements for Pharmaceuticals for Human Use  
 
ICH Secretariat, Route Pré -Bois 20, P.O. Box 1894, 1215 Geneva, Switzerland  
Telephone: +41 (22) 710 7480 - admin@ich.org, http://www.ich.org   
Final  Concept Paper  
ICH Q14:  Analytical Procedure Development and Revision of Q2(R1) Analytical 
Validation  
dated 14 November 2018 
Endorsed by the Management Committee on 15 November 2018 
 
 
Type of Harmoni sation Action Proposed  
 
It is proposed to develop a new quality guideline on Analytical Procedure Development and 
to revise the ICH Q2(R1) Guideline on Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and 
Methodology.  
The Expert Working Group should potentially determine the feasibility to combine both 
documents into one for simplification and clarity.  
 
Q14 Analytical Procedure Development guideline  
The new guideline is proposed for harmonising the scientific approaches of Analytical 
Procedur e Development, and providing the principles relating to the description of Analytical 
Procedure Development process. Applying this guideline will improve regulatory 
communication between industry and regulators and facilitate more efficient, sound scientif ic 
and risk- based approval as well as post -approval change management of analytical 
procedures.  
 
Q2(R1) Revision 
The scope of the revision will include validation principles that cover analytical use of 
spectroscopic or spectrometry data (e.g., NIR, Raman, NMR or MS) some of which often 
require multivariate statistical analyses.  
The guideline will continue to provide a general framework for the principles of analytical 
procedure validation applicable to products mostly in the scope of Q6A and Q6B.  
 
These proposed guidelines (Q2 and Q14) are intended to complement with ICH Q8 to Q12 
Guidelines, as well as on -going ICH Q13 for Continuous Manufacturing.  
 
Statement of the Perceived Problem  
 
Q14Analytical Procedure Development guideline  
Since there is no ICH guideline on Analytical Procedure Development, applicants often report  
analytical validation results alone and rarely present performance evaluation with analytical 
development outcomes. This makes regulatory communication ineffective  especially when 
non-conventional (for example, real time release testing) analytical procedures are employed. 
Additionally, the lack of guidelines precludes the applicant from an opportunity to present 
scientific basis for flexible regulatory approaches to post -approval Analytical Procedure 
changes.  
 
Q2(R1) Revision 
The current Q2(R1) “Guideline on Validation of Analytical Procedures: Text and 
Methodology” does not cover more recent application of analytical procedures, (e.g., Near 

FINAL  Q2(R2)/Q14  Concept Paper  Endorsed: 15 November 2018  
 
-2- Infrared (NIR) Spectroscopy or Raman Spectroscopy). The lack of guidance for these 
analytical data sets can lead to submissions with inadequate validation data for such analytical 
procedures, resulting in recursive information requests and responses, which can delay 
application approval. This is particularly the case for procedures reliant on multivariate 
models, a category for which no ICH validation guideline exists. Spectroscopy tools like NIR 
or Raman are commonly used in process control and real time testing of pharmaceutical 
products using m ultivariate analysis methods. Taking into consideration a difference between 
multivariate and traditional methods, the current approach of Q2 (R1) is not sufficient to 
establish the suitability of multivariate methods. For example, when traditional methods  use 
reference standards, analysed along with the unknown samples, the performance of these 
methods is confirmed and assured during each test. By contrast, multivariate model -based 
methods often do not use reference standards during analysis. This makes robust 
development, validation and proper maintenance of such methods of utmost importance for 
reliable prediction throughout the method lifecycle. 
 
Issues to be Resolved  
 
Q14Analytical Procedure Development guideline  
Analytical procedures are necessary to d evelop products and manufacturing process, to 
measure critical quality attributes and to ensure the quality of final products. These analytics 
would be modified or improved throughout the product lifecycle because of continual 
improvement activities. Thus,  the new guideline will provide an opportunity to present the 
outcome of Analytical Procedure Development in traditional approaches and in enhanced 
approaches and facilitate efficient and science -based change management by improving 
communication between i ndustry and regulators.  
Some of main technical and scientific elements, which require harmonization, include:  
- Submission of Analytical Procedure Development and related information in CTD format  
- The concept and strategy of enhanced approaches for Analytic al Procedures  
- Performance criteria of Analytical Procedures.  
- In line with ICH Q8 and ICH Q11, greater understanding of Analytical Procedure can 
create the basis for more efficient, sound science and risked -based change management 
(e.g., using analytical Qu ality by Design principles).  
- Key elements and terminology  
- Demonstration of suitability for Real Time Release testing.  
 
Q2(R1) Revision 
In addition to the current guideline, the revised guideline will define the common validation 
characteristics for procedures, like NIR, nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR), 
and hyphenated techniques, for example CE -MS, CE -ICP-MS, LC -NMR, GC -MS, L C-MS. 
Although these techniques utilize very different instrumentation, the data output is an 
intensity across a frequency range or mass to charge ratio range. When necessary, the data 
analysis can be simplified via  appropriate use of multivariate statistical analyses to compare 
measurements between test and reference samples.  
Procedures reliant on multivariate methods below will be also addressed:  
- Definition of validation characteristics applicable to multivariate methods which may 
differ with the area of application ( e.g., identification vs.  quantitation, batch vs.  continuous 
process, dosage form assay vs. blending monitoring)  
- Important method parameters ( e.g., the number of latent variables) established during 
method development  
- Robustness which is well understood, however does not have a quantitative measure  

FINAL  Q2(R2)/Q14  Concept Paper  Endorsed: 15 November 2018  
 
-3- - Inclusion of post -approval verification and maintenance considerations as a part of the 
validation  
- Requirements for validation data sets  
 
Background to the Proposal  
 
The new Analytical Procedure Development guideline ( Q14) will be for S4, P4 and P5 of 
CTD and will complement with Q8(R2) and Q11.  
The objective of this proposal is to provide an opportunity to present the knowledge obtained 
through applying the enhanced a pproaches to analytical procedures. The proposed guideline 
will facilitate selecting or identifying development approaches that will streamline post -
approval changes to procedures and enable more efficient, sound science - and risk- based 
change management. Applying the enhanced approach for analytical procedures can 
contribute to the resource -efficient drug development and post -approval CMC changes.  
 
The revised Q2(R1) guideline will be for S4, P4 and P5 of CTD with emphasis on systematic 
Analytical Developm ent. 
The expected outcome would be an expanded Q2 that would specifically address validation of 
some of the newer analytical procedures, and include a discussion of statistical aspects in 
validation.  
The revision of Q2(R1) will include validation approach es for analytical method based on 
instrumentation that provides spectra across a frequency range (e.g., Raman, NIR or NMR) or 
across a mass to charge range (i.e., mass spectrometry). The revision will also include 
presentation of appropriate multivariate s tatistical methods with consideration of sample size 
and ongoing method performance verification.  
 
As Analytical Development activities are followed by Analytical Validation activities, the two 
tasks above will be conducted in an orchestrated manner by one EWG. Two separate 
documents will be produced.  
 
Type of Expert Working Group and Resources  
 
Because activities are strongly interrelated, one Expert Working Group will be designated to 
establish the new Analytical Procedure Development and revise ICH Q2(R 1). 
An Expert Working Group composed of experts with expertise in the area of analytical 
chemistry and pharmaceutical control is needed.  
 
Timing  
 
It is proposed that this work is initiated in fall of 2018 following finalization of the Concept 
Paper and Business Plan and establishment of an Expert Working Group.  
 
By Fall 2018; Final Concept Paper, The first Face to Face EWG meeting 
Spring 2019; 2nd F2F EWG meeting  
Fall 2019; 3rd F2F EWG meeting 
(Finish two draft documents to be reviewed within Member/Observer parties for both).  
Spring 2020; 4th F2T EWG meeting 
(Step 2 for both)  
Spring 2021; 5th F2F EWG meeting 
(Step 4 for both)  

