Presentation Name Here (Arial Bold)
Date XX, 2018 (Arial)
What is 
Clinicaltrials.gov, 
and do you need 
to register your 
study?
Anu Mathur, MS, CIP
EQUIP Administrator
PRS Administrator
949-824-9819
anuradhm@uci.edu
What is clinicaltrials.gov ?
•It is a resource that provides access to information on clinical trials studying a 
wide range of diseases, conditions and interventions.
•Studies listed in the database are conducted in all 50 States and in 220 countries.
•Each ClinicalTrials.gov record includes summary information about studies such 
as:
•Study design and Intervention
•Disease or condition
•Requirements for participation (eligibility criteria )
•Locations and Contact information 
•Some records may include outcomes of the study
Sources: 1) CITI Program -Transparency in Clinical Research: ClinicalTrials.gov in context –Tim Bacon. 2) ClinicalTrials.gov
Summary of requirements:
Source: Clinicaltrials.gov enforcement: an update. Anthony Keys. January 18, 2022Entity Registration Results Reporting Penalties
Health and Human 
Services
(HHS)Within 21 days of 
enrollmentWithin 365 days of primary completion date for ACTs•$12,316/study/day
•Criminal proceedings
•Loss of grant funding
National Institutes 
of Health 
(NIH)Within 21 days of enrollmentWithin 365 days of primary completion date for clinical trials receiving NIH fundingLoss of grant funding (to 
include the institution)
National Cancer Institute 
(NCI)Within 21 days of enrollmentWithin 365 days of primary completion date of 
NCI-supported clinical trials (in a peer -reviewed 
journal and/ or
ClinicalTrials.gov)Loss of grant funding
Veterans Health Administration
(VHA)Prior to release of 
funding. Prior to 
enrollmentWithin 365 days of primary completion date Loss of grant funding
Summary of requirements:
Source: Clinicaltrials.gov enforcement: an update. Anthony Keys. January 18, 2022Entity Registration Results Reporting Penalties
Centers for Medicare & 
Medicaid Services 
(CMS)All qualifying clinical trials Study- specific •Coverage denial
•Costs and fraud 
investigations
Patient- Centered 
Outcomes Research 
Institute 
(PCORI)All Clinical studies 
(including observational)Expected of all PCORI Clinical studies –500 word abstract 
published on PCORI website•Loss of grant funding
International Committee of 
Medical Journal Editors 
(ICMJE)Prior to enrollment Ineligibility to publish
Department of Defense
(DoD)Prior to enrollment.
Prior to release of funding. Study- specific •$12,103/study/day
•Withholding or recovery of award funds
Registration may be required if one (or more) of the following 
is true:
1.The study is funded by the National Institutes of Health 
(NIH) AND meets the NIH definition of a clinical trial
2.The study involves drugs, devices, or biologics that are regulated by 
the Food and Drug Administration (FDA)
3.There is a plan to publish the results in a medical journal AND the 
study meets the International Committee of Medical Journal Editors 
(ICMJE) definition of a clinical trial
4.If your clinical trial will bill routine costs to Medicare , the study must be 
registered on ClinicalTrials.gov 
5.If you have a clinical trial that includes a drug that available via expanded access
.
6.If your clinical trial receives funding from Department of Defense 
(check with program Officer), PCORI , National Cancer Institute , 
Veterans Affairs

NIH funded clinical trials are required to be registered :
•If your study is NIH funded and meets the NIH definition of a clinical trial ,then 
clinicaltrials.gov registration is required.
•For NIH funded research, use the following four questions to determine the difference
between a clinical study and a clinical trial :
Does the study involve human participants ?
Are the participants prospectively assigned to one or more interventions ?
Is the study designed to evaluate the effect of the intervention on the 
participants?
Is the effect being evaluated a health -related biomedical or behavioral 
outcome ?
•If the answers to ALL 4 questions are “yes” , your study meets the NIH definition of a 
clinical trial.
NIH Definition of an “INTERVENTION”:
An "intervention" is defined as a manipulation of the subject or subject’s 
environment for the purpose of modifying one or more health- related 
biomedical or behavioral processes and/or endpoints. 
Examples include: 
•drugs/small molecules/compounds; 
•biologics; devices; 
•procedures (e.g., surgical techniques); 
•delivery systems (e.g., telemedicine, face -to-face interviews); 
•strategies to change health-related behavior (e.g., diet, cognitive therapy, exercise, 
development of new habits); 
•treatment strategies; prevention strategies; and diagnostic strategies.
This includes 
–studies with healthy participants
–Phase 1 trials of FDA -regulated drugs 
and biological products
–Small feasibility studies of FDA 
regulated device products
–studies with no comparison group 
(placebo or control)
–studies designed to assess the 
pharmacokinetics / safety of an investigational drug
–Studies where only one aim or sub -aim 
meets the clinical trial definition .
Source: https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical -trials/definition.htm
Some NIH funded Basic experimental studies involving humans are 
also required to be registered:
Basic experimental studies involving humans ( BESH ) 
are studies that meet both the definition of basic 
research and the NIH definition of a clinical trial .
Basic research uses a range of probes or experimental 
manipulations to perturb a physiological process 
(including cognitive and perceptual processes). 
NIH published clinical trial case studies with examples 
of BESH (cases 9, 14, 40 & 41). 
Example: healthy volunteers randomized to 
different durations of sleep deprivation where the dependent variable is stress hormone levels.
Source: https://grants.nih.gov/policy/clinical -trials/besh.htm
Registration is also required if your study meets 
the DHHS definition of an Applicable Clinical 
Trial (ACT). These include:
•Controlled clinical investigations (other than phase 1 
investigations) of any U.S. Food and Drug 
Administration (FDA) -regulated drug or biological 
product for any disease or condition
•It also includes certain studies of FDA-regulated 
medical devices, and FDA-required pediatric post 
market surveillances of a device product

applicable clinical 
trials (ACT’s):
The Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act of 
2007 ( FDAAA ) established legal requirements for 
sponsors and designated principal investigators (i.e., 
responsible parties) to report specified clinical trial 
information for certain ACT’s to ClinicalTrials.gov .
The requirements are designed to 
provide potential participants with information about 
trials of interest , 
reduce publication bias, 
help institutional review boards (IRBs) determine the 
appropriateness of a research study , 
and promote more efficient allocation of research funds.
Checklist for Evaluating 
Whether a Clinical Trial or 
Study is an Applicable 
Clinical Trial
Researchers can use the 
following tools to determine if their trial meets the DHHS definition of an ACT:
Identifying an ACT 
under FDAAA 
(flowchart)
Identifying an Applicable clinical trial: 

ACT – important definitions:
Is the study interventional (a clinical trial)?
Interventional is defined in the final rule to mean, with respect to a clinical study or a clinical investigation, that 
participants are assigned prospectively to an intervention or interventions according to a protocol to evaluate the 
effect of the intervention(s) on biomedical or other health -related outcomes. [Source: 42 CFR 11.10(a); 81 FR 
65140-41] 
Does the study evaluate at least one U.S. FDA-regulated drug, biological, or device product?
A device product is considered to be subject to section 510(k), 515, or 520(m) of the FD&C Act if any of the 
following is required before it may be legally marketed in the United States : (1) a finding of substantial equivalence 
under section 510(k) of the FD&C Act, (2) an order under section 515 of the FD&C Act approving a premarket approval 
application ( PMA ) for the device product, or (3) an HDE under section 520(m) of the FD&C Act. 
Device products that are considered to be subject to section 510(k), 515, or 520(m) of the FD&C Act include significant 
risk devices for which approval of an IDE is required, non-significant risk devices that are considered to have an 
approved IDE in accordance with 21 CFR 812.2(b), or device products that are exempt from the submission requirements 
of 21 CFR part 812. [Source: 81 FR 65012] 
Registration Requirements per International Committee of Medical 
Journal Editors (ICMJE ):
In 2005 , the ICMJE defined trials that must be registered in order to be 
considered for publication in journals that adhere to ICMJE standards. 
“we will consider a trial for publication only if it has been registered before the enrollment of the first patient. This 
policy applies to trials that start recruiting on or after July 1, 2005. Because many ongoing trials were not registered 
at inception, we will consider for publication ongoing trials that are registered before September 13, 2005. ”
In 2007 , the ICMJE expanded the definition of trials that must be 
registered. 
Many journals (not limited to medical journals) have adopted the registration 
policy.
Source: http://www.icmje.org/
ICMJE DEFINITION OF CLINICAL TRIAL
In June 2007 the ICMJE adopted the WHO's definition of clinical trial: " any research study that prospectively 
assigns human participants or groups of humans to one or more health -related interventions to evaluate the 
effects on health outcomes .”  
with or without concurrent comparison or control groups,  
Health -related interventions are those used to modify a biomedical or health-related outcome; examples include 
drugs, surgical procedures , devices, behavioral treatments , educational programs , dietary interventions, 
quality improvement interventions, and process -of-care changes. 
Health outcomes are any biomedical or health -related measures obtained in patients or participants, including 
pharmacokinetic measures and adverse events. 
Purely observational studies (those in which the assignment of the medical intervention is not at the discretion of the 
investigator) will not require registration.
The ICMJE …
…encourages registration of research with non-trial designs (e.g., observational studies)
…journals will consider trials beginning on or after July 1, 2005 only if registration occurred before the 
first patient was enrolled ("prospective registration").
…does not define the timing of first participant enrollment, but best practice dictates registration by the 
time of first participant consent.
An acceptable registry must include the minimum 24-item trial registration data set at the time of 
registration.
**Those who are uncertain whether their trial meets the expanded ICMJE definition should 
err on the side of registration if they wish to seek publication in an ICMJE journal**
Required for Medicare Billing:
If your study will bill routine costs to Medicare or any other insurer, the study must be registered on 
ClinicalTrials.gov to obtain the NCT#.
•AQualifying Clinical Trial (QCT) is a trial that meets the requirements set forth in the Clinical Trial 
Policy (NCD 310.1) by the Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Service (CMS) .  
•Once a trial has been determined to be a QCT, the routine costs associated with it are billable to and reimbursable by Medicare and third -party payors. 
•CMS requires a clinical trial identifier (NCT#) be reported on all billing claims for items/ services 
related to a qualifying clinical trial . 
Expanded access use:
•Under FDA regulations (21 CFR 312.300), expanded access allows for the use of 
unapproved drugs and biologics outside of a clinical trial for patients with serious 
diseases or conditions when there is no satisfactory alternative therapy to treat the 
patient’s disease or condition. This is sometimes referred to as compassionate use or 
treatment use.
•Expanded access records which describe the procedure for obtaining an experimental 
drug or device outside of a clinical trial are required to be submitted to 
theClinicalTrials.gov database.
Other Funding Entities Requiring CT.gov Registration:
Registration may be required if your clinical trial receives funding 
from:
Department of Defense (check with program Officer)
PCORI
National Cancer Institute
Veterans Affairs
Why Do I Need to Register My Trial and Submit Results to 
ClinicalTrials.gov? here are just some of the reasons…
Required by Law: Section 801 of the Food and Drug Administration Amendments Act (FDAAA 801) requires 
responsible parties to register clinical trials and submit summary results to ClinicalTrials.gov. 
Required for Journal Publication: The International Committee of Medical Journal Editors (ICMJE) requires trial 
registration as a condition of the publication of research results generated by a clinical trial.
All NIH -funded clinical trials are expected to register and submit results information to Clinicaltrials.gov , as per the 
"NIH Policy on Dissemination of NIH -Funded Clinical Trial Information "for competing applications and contract 
proposals.
WMA Declaration of Helsinki -Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects : "Every 
research study involving human subjects must be registered in a publicly accessible database before recruitment of 
the first subject" (para. 35).
What is the penalty for non -compliance?
Under NIH Policy: Noncompliance with the terms and conditions of the NIH 
award may provide a basis for enforcement actions, such as withholding 
current and future funding [ 45 CFR 75.371 ,42 CFR 11.66 ]
Under Final Rule , responsible parties could be held accountable 
fornoncompliance , with the potential for substantial civil monetary 
penalties , the withholding of grant funding from HHS agencies, and 
criminal proceedings .[2016 NEJM article ]
Case in point:
On 28 April 2021 , the FDA issued its first Notice of Noncompliance to Georgia -based 
Accuitis who failed to submit required summary results information. The company could 
be “subject to a civil monetary penalty of $10,000 for each day of the violation” until 
the noncompliance is corrected.
ICMJE: authors failing to prospectively register a trial risk its inadmissibility 
to journals following the ICMJE’s trial registration policy.

My study does not meet the CT.gov registration criteria…but can I register anyway?
Source: Final Rule 42 CFR Part 11: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/FR -2016 -09-21/pdf/2016 -22129.pdfIn 2015: 19,170 clinical trials were registered. 7,400 were applicable clinical trials, the remainder 11,770 trials, can be considered 
voluntary or to not fall under the rule. Of these, 526 were NIH funded. This leaves an estimated 11,244 trials that do not fall under either 
the rule or the NIH policy!
DHHS expects that these clinical trials will:
•submit the same clinical trial registration information as is submitted for applicable clinical trials that are subject to the rule. 
•expects that information submitted for such clinical trials will be updated as frequently as information for applicable clinical trials 
that are subject to the rule. 
•Estimated annual burden of 269,856 hours (almost 90,000 hours initial registration, rest from updates)
Voluntary registration places a burden on the responsible party to comply with all registration and update requirements . Any 
ongoing non- compliance with these requirements on the part of the responsible party.
Who is responsible for registering and Submitting Results to ClinicalTrials.gov? 
The “Responsible Party” refers to the entity or individual who is 
responsible for registering a trial on ClinicalTrials.gov. 
The Responsible Party is responsible for the initial release of the record, all future updates and ensuring the trial registration stays 
accurate and up -to-date. 
For studies registered by UCI, the PI serves as the responsible party if they meet all the following criteria:
1.They are responsible for conducting the clinical trial .
2.They have access to and control over the data
3.They have the right to publish the results of the trial
4.They can meet all the requirements for the submission of clinical trial information.
[Source: Elaboration of Definitions of Responsible Party and Applicable Clinical Trial .]

Submission process:
1. A ClinicalTrials.gov staff member will review 
the study record after it is submitted and before 
it is published on ClinicalTrials.gov. 
2. The review process may take up to a few 
days . Ensuring that the record is consistent with 
the ClinicalTrials.gov Protocol Review 
Criteria (PDF) before releasing it will expedite 
publication on the site.
3. After it is accepted by review staff for publication, the record, including its NCT 
Number, will be available on ClinicalTrials.gov within 2 –5 business days.

Obligations of 
the 
Responsible 
Party once 
registered 
Source: https://clinicaltrials.gov/ct2/manage -recs/faq

27Applies to clinical 
trials conducted or 
supported by a Federal department or agency using the Common Rule 
(e.g., 
NIH, DOD, DVA)The consent form must have been used 
in enrolling participantsShould be uploaded no later than 60 days after the last study visit by any subject, 
as required by the protocolMust be uploaded to 
either 
ClinicalTrials.gov or 
a docket folder on Regulations.govNEW: Uploading the Consent Form per revised Common Rule
[Source: §46.116   General requirements for informed consent.]Effective January 21, 2019. Important considerations regarding the uploading of the informed consent form: