Factsheet: publication of clinical trial results  
Network of coordination centres for clinical trials – KKS-Netzwerk e.V. 13. 
Februar 2020   
Over  the last months , the media have repeated ly discussed the  publication of the results of clinical 
trials. A debate was triggered by the critical positions voiced by the ALL Trials Initiative 
(https://www.alltri als.net/ ), whose  supporte rs include  the British Medical Journal  
(https://www.bmj.com/ ), the Centre for Evidence -based Medicine (https://www.cebm.net/ ) and the 
Cochrane Collaboration (https://www.cochrane.org/ ). Academic  clinical researchers  in particular 
were criticised for not  mak ing their data available to the public , or not quickly enough,  and thus 
contributing  to bias in  the body of evidence. The German Network of coordination centres for clinical 
trials  (KKS -Netzwerk e.V. – KKSN)  has long been attending to this problem. Below , you will  find a 
summary of the facts as seen by the KKSN.   
 
Timely  publication of the results of clinical trials is both a scientific and an 
ethical imperative  
The publication of the results of clinical trials is a scientific and ethic al imperative as noted  by leading 
organisations such as the World Medical Association and the WHO (12, 3). To be able to weigh the 
benefits  and risks of medical procedures or medications, a  complete  overview as of the current 
evidence  is essential. This does not  only apply to new medications and procedu res. Such an 
assessment is always to be seen in the temporal  context of the current state of knowledge . It is thus 
to be reviewed and updated once new data becomes available. If the publication  of clinical trials is 
delay ed or does not take place at all , this can bias the bas is for such an assessment (publication bias).  
Furthermore, one has an  ethical obligation toward the trial participants , who consent to participat e 
and can expect the results  of the trial to be p ublished . Finally , it is a waste of sig nificant human  and 
financial resources if clinical trials are terminated  without their results being published. This was 
discussed  in the Lancet’s  publication  series:  „Research: increasing value, reducing waste“  
(https://www.thelancet.com/series/research ).  
 
Where are the results from clinical trials being published?   
In general, results of clinical trials are published in scientific journals. During the publication  process , 
submitted manuscripts undergo strict scientific evaluation by independent experts (peer review).  
Moreover , clinical trial results  can be made available in public clinical trials registries. However, in 
this case , there is no  independent peer rev iew. In clinical trials involving medicinal products , there is 
even a legal  obligation to publish clinical trial results in a public registry (1, 2). This applies 
irrespective of whether the findings are published in a scientific journal or not.   
 
Which study registries are available ? 
In accordance with the terms of the Declaration of Helsinki  (3), the International Committee of 
Medical Journals Editors (I CMJE)  (4) requires  that only those trials should be published that were 
register ed in an eligible registry  prior to the start of patient recruitment . There are already a 
considera ble number of publicly accessible registries for clinical trials. The World Health Organisation  
has set up a web portal  serving as a meta platform to collect  entries from existing registries  
throug hout the world . All basic data of trials listed in national registries can be retrieved from there 
(https://www.w ho.int//ictrp/search/en/ . 
Publicly  accessible registries of particular relevance for Germany  are:  
 
German register of clinical trials (DRKS, drks.de)  
The DRKS informs in English and German about clinical trials carried out in Germany. All kinds of 
clinical trials can be registered there (interventional trial s with medicinal products , medical devices or 
other therapeutic procedures, prospective observational  studies, trials on diagnostic strategies). 
Although registration is voluntary, German funding bodies like the DFG and BMBF  explicitly mention 
the DRKS in the context of requesting the public registration of trials . For each trial registered with 
the DRKS,  basic data such as title, short description , inclusion and exclusion criteria, study status and 
endpoints are retrievable. Results can be uploaded . The DRKS is free and run by the German Institute 
of Medical Documentation and Information, an agency embedd ed in  the Federal Ministry of Health 
(BMG). The DRKS is accredited as a register by the WHO.  
 
ClinicalTrials.gov (clinicaltrials.gov)  
ClinicalTrials.gov is a registr y primarily for clinical trials carried out in the USA, but open for trials 
from other countries. It is  operated by the National Institutes of Health (NIH) . As with the DRKS , all 
kinds of studies can be registered and results can be recorded. Sponsors and investigators of certain 
trials have been legally bound in the USA since 2008 to register their trials with  ClinicalTrials.gov  and 
to post results  (5, 6) . With more than 300 ,000 trials from 209 countries ClinicalTrials.gov is the m ost 
comprehensive  registr y acknowledged by the WHO.  
 
EU Clinical Trials Register (clinicaltrialsregister.eu)  
The EU Clinical Trials Register (EUCTR) accesses  the EudraCT database (European Union Drug 
Regulating Authorities Clinical Trials Database) , a database exclusively for interventional cli nical 
studies with medicinal products within the European Union. The database is operated by the 
European Medicines Agency  (EMA) and used by the competent authorities of the respective member 
states  during approval and for  supervision of clinical trials with medicinal products. Clinical trials with 
medicinal products carried out in the EU must be approved in ad vance by the competent authorities  
(7). As part of the authorisation process, registration with the EUCTR is compulsory. The EUCTR also 
allows  spon sors the ability to document clinical study results in a standardised manner. However, the 
public can only see the results after approval and release by the EMA. Unfortunately, part of the 
process of data activation  is only carried out after considerable d elay. 
 
PharmNet.Bund (pharmnet -bund.de)  
PharmNet.Bund  is the portal  for information  on medicinal products of  the German  federal 
government and the states. The integrated database ‘clinical trials’ contains information about  
clinical trials that were approved in Germany for  medicinal products, including a report of the  results. 
The database is operated exclusively by the responsible competent  authorities ( Federal Institute for 
Drugs and Medical Devices  (BfArM) ), Paul -Ehrlich -Institut e (German Federal Agency for Sera and 
Vaccines , PEI). Reports submitted to the competent  authorities by the sponsors of clinical trials are 
made available to the public  with a delay of up to several years. Sponsors of clinical trials have no 
means of influenc ing this lengthy process.  
Is there a statutory obligation to publish results of clinical trials?  
In Germany, the legal requirement to publish results only holds for  clinical trials with medicinal 
products . For all other kinds of clinical trials there is no legal obligation for results to be made 
available to the public. The current 2013 Declaration of Helsinki (3) states th ough that “ Researchers 
have a duty to make publicly available the results of their res earch on human subjects ”. According to 
the (ideal ) code of conduct  for doctors working in Germany , the Helsinki declaration has to be 
observed within the frame work  of research.  
 
Clinical Trials with medicinal products  
Status quo: For clinical trials with  medicinal products conducted in the EU, there is a legal obligation 
to publish trial results , which is based on the European Regulations 726/2004 (8) and 1901/2006 (9).  
These provide the legal bas is for the establishment  of the public clinical trials database on 
PharmNet .Bund , a database containing information on medicinal products, provided by the German 
federal government and the state s. The German medicines law and the subordinate regulation on 
the application of Good Clinical Practice for the conduct of clinical trials with medicinal products (1, 
2) oblige sponsors of clinical trials to submit a report to the competent authority  within  one year of 
terminati ng the trial . This holds for all clinical trials that were started in Germany since 2004. After 
revision  by the responsible authority, the report is published on the publicly accessible portal 
PharmNet.Bund.  
In 2012, the EU published guideline  2012/c302/03 (10) , complementing the previous regulations 
726/2004 (8)  and 1901/2006 (9)  with regard to the disclosure of results from clinical trials. In 
particular, the guideline requir es that results  from c linical trials  have to be su bmitted to the EudraCT 
database (and therewith on EUCTR) in a standardised manner. This extension  of the EudraCT 
database was completed  on 21. 07.2014. Since then, sponsors can submit results directly to the 
EudraCT database.  
However, a  European guideline is not legally binding in the same way  as a regulation. In Germany, 
the German medicines law continues to  be the authoritative source for sponsors of clinical trials. 
Already i n 2014, the KKSN raised the topic with the EU -commission  in a detailed letter . Receipt of the 
letter was acknowledged.  
Future stat us: On 16 June 2014 the n ew EU -regulation 536/2014 (11) on clinical trials on  medicinal 
products came into effect . This regulation only becomes valid,  however, after completion and full 
functionality  of an EU-portal and an associated database for the transmission of data and 
information on clinical trials . Its completion was scheduled for 2016 but has been postponed 
repeatedly since. Even now , six years  after the regulation  came into effect , it is not yet possible to 
forecast when the database will be executable and hence the regulation becoming valid.  Upon  
validity of the EU-regulation 536/2014, article 37  stipulates that reporting  of results from clinical 
trials via the EU portal becomes legally binding within the entire EU (Joint Letter by the European 
Commission, EMA and HMA, June 2019).  
To summarise , in Germany it is currently legally required that results from clinical trials with 
medicinal products are made public. This takes place through  submission of the final report to the 
competent  authorities . For other kinds of clinical trials, for instance those with medical devices, there 
are currently no such legal requirements. With the creation of the EU regulations 536/2014 
(medicinal products) and 2017/745 (medical devices – legall y binding from May 2020 (12)),  the legal 
basis was set up for the  reporting of results from clinical trials  to the respective register. Concerning 
clinical trials with medicinal products, this reporting obligation is linked to a corresponding European 
data base structure, the completion of which has already been postponed for several years. 
Notwithstanding the above, the publication of results from clinical trials should be an ethical 
imperative to all researchers.   
 
What about the rate of publication of clinical trials conducted at university 
medical centres?   
In recent years, p ublic disclosure of results from clinical trials has increasingly been sp otlighted by 
both methodological research and public debate. Reliable statements with regard to the rate of 
publication, however, a re methodologically difficult. This is because, as outlined above, there are 
different ways in which  the results from clinical trials  can be published .  
All analyses carried out to date show , however , that a substantial proportion  of clinical trials remains 
unpublished . Depending on methodological and temporal aspects, publication rates in scientific 
journals and study registries of 54% have been reported ( clinical trials with medicinal products 
phases II-IV, with  completion 2006 - 2015) (13), 71% ( for randomised trials with a large number of 
participants, completion before 2009) (14), 66% ( for academic studies in the USA , with completion of 
studies 2007 - 2010) (15) und 74% ( for interventional academic trials  in Germany  (16).  
If one looks at the rate of prompt ly reported clinical trial results (that is within 24 months following 
study completion as required by the WHO (17) ), numbers are much  lower. In interventional academic 
trials  from  Germany , a positive trend  in publication rate can be seen : in trials completed in 
2009/2010 , 35% were disclosed within 24 months  compared  to 42% for trials from 2013 (16).  
Two further publi cations that attracted public attention  analysed the disclosure of results from 
clinical trials i n public registries, with the objective of assess ing compliance with the relevant laws : 
Goldacre et al. (18) for the EU, and De Vito et al (19) for the USA.  In the analysis by Goldacre et al. , 
however,  compliance of German sponsors is considerably underestimated since according to German 
legislation , results from clinical trials have to be reported to the competent  authorities , who in turn 
disclose those reports to the public via the PharmNet.Bund portal and not on EUCTR.  
The overall conclusion is that results from a number of clinical trials are still not being published – 
neither in journals nor on registries.  
 
How could the rate of publication be enhanced in the future?  
The KKSN believes that th e following measures could contribute to the improvement of the situation:   
- Definition of a harmonised basic data set for reporting of results approved by all registries – in 
extension to the information bel onging to the core data set requested by the WHO  
- Extension  of the WHO portal, via which  trial data from all registries can be retrieved, to 
information on study results . This would have the benefit that one central portal could provide 
an overview on results from all kinds of clinical studies.  
- The establishment of the legal framework by which scientific publications that have undergone 
peer review  and are available to t he public as ‘Open Access’  can be considered sufficient trial 
reporting . The corresponding register could provide a link to the publication.  
- Improve the possibility for timely public disclosure also  of trials with negative results, 
discontinued trials or trials lacking fundamental gain of insight.  
- Timely processing and posting of reports submitted to  the competent  authorities (for 
PharmNet.Bund portal) and the EMA (for the EUCTR).  
- Establishing a  public ation  ethic  at universit ies that encourages  timely disclosure  of studies , 
irrespective of results and thus of the impact of the publication medium . This would constitute a 
major step toward  increased transparency. This could be realised for example  by considering 
such aspects  when allocating performance -oriented funds.  
The members of the KKSN are committed  to contribut ing to the improvement of the situation and 
therefore endorse the appeal of the WHO (17).  
 
Referen ces  
1. Gesetz über den Verkehr mit Arzneimitteln - Arzneimittelgesetz in der Fassung der 
Bekanntmachung vom 12. Dezember 2005 (BGBl. I S. 3394), das zuletzt durch Artikel 18 des Gesetzes 
vom 20. November 2019 (BGBl. I S. 1626) geändert worden ist: AMG.  
2. Verordnung über die Anwendung der Guten Klinisch en Praxis bei der Durchführung von klinischen 
Prüfungen mit Arzneimitteln zur Anwendung am Menschen - GCP-Verordnung vom 9. August 2004 
(BGBl. I S. 2081), die zuletzt durch Artikel 8 des Gesetzes vom 19. Oktober 2012 (BGBl. I S. 2192) 
geändert worden ist: GCP-Verordnung - GCP-V.  
3. Declaration of Helsinki: Ethical Principles for Medical Research Involving Human Subjects. 2013.  
4. International Committee of Medical Journal Editors. Clinical trial registration in recommendations 
for the conduct, reporting, editing, and publication of scholarly work in medical journals. 2018. 
Available from: URL: http://www.icmje.org/icmje -recommendations.pdf .  
5. Food and Drug Administration: Amendments Act of 2007. Public Law 110 –85. 2007. Available 
from: URL: https://www.govinfo.gov/content/pkg/PLAW -110publ85/pdf/PLAW -110publ85.pdf .  
6. National Institutes of Health, Department of Health and Human Services: Clinical trials registration 
and results information submission: final rule. 2016.  
7. Directive 2001/20/EC of 4 April 2001, of the European Parliament and of the Counc il on the 
approximation of the laws, regulations and administrative provisions of the Member States relating 
to implementation of good clinical practice in the conduct of clinical trials on medicinal products for 
human use: EC 2001/20. Official Journal of the European Union 2001; L 121: 34 –44.  
8. Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 31 March 2004 
laying down Community procedures for the authorisation and supervision of medicinal products for 
human and veterinary use and establishing a European Medicines Agency: EC 726/2004. Official 
Journal of the European Union 2004; L 136: 1 -33.  
9. Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 12 December 
2006 on medicinal products for paediatric use  and amending Regulation (EEC) No 1768/92, Directive 
2001/20/EC, Directive 2001/83/EC and Regulation (EC) No 726/2004: EC 1901/2006;. Official Journal 
of the European Union 2006; L 378: 1 -19.  
10. Commission Guideline — Guidance on Posting and Publication of Result -Related Information on 
Clinical Trials in Relation to the Implementation of Article 57(2) of Regulation (EC) No 726/2004 and 
Article 41(2) of Regulation (EC) No 1901/2006: EC 2012/c30 2/03. Official Journal of the European 
Union 2012; C 302: 2 -10.  
11. Regulation (EU) No 536/2014 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 16 April 2014 on 
clinical trials on medicinal products for human use, and repealing Directive 2001/20/EC: EC 
536/2014. Official Journal of the European Union 2014; L 158: 1 -76.  
12. Regulation (EU) 2017/745 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 5 April 2017 on 
medical devices, amending Directive 2001/83/EC, Regulation (EC) No 178/2002 and Regulation (EC ) 
No 1223/2009 and repealing Council Directives 90/385/EEC and 93/42/EEC. Official Journal of the 
European Union 2017; L 117: 1 –175.  
13. Zwierzyna M, Davies M, Hingorani AD, Hunter J. Clinical trial design and dissemination: 
comprehensive analysis of clin icaltrials.gov and PubMed data since 2005. BMJ 2018; 361: k2130.  
14. Jones CW, Handler L, Crowell KE, Keil LG, Weaver MA, Platts -Mills TF. Non -publication of large 
randomized clinical trials: cross sectional analysis. BMJ 2013; 347: f6104.  
15. Chen R, De sai NR, Ross JS, Zhang W, Chau KH, Wayda B et al. Publication and reporting of clinical 
trial results: cross sectional analysis across academic medical centers. BMJ 2016; 352: i637.  
16. Wieschowski S, Riedel N, Wollmann K, Kahrass H, Müller -Ohlraun S, Sch ürmann C et al. Result 
dissemination from clinical trials conducted at German university medical centers was delayed and 
incomplete. J Clin Epidemiol 2019; 115: 37 –45.  
17. Joint statement on public disclosure of results from clinical trials; 2017. Availab le from: URL: 
https://www.who.int/ictrp/results/jointstatement/en/ .  
18. Goldacre B, DeVito NJ, Heneghan C, Irving F, Bacon S, Fleminger J et al. Compliance with 
requirement to report res ults on the EU Clinical Trials Register: cohort study and web resource. BMJ 
2018; 362: k3218.  
19. DeVito NJ, Bacon S, Goldacre B. Compliance with legal requirement to report clinical trial results 
on ClinicalTrials.gov: a cohort study. The Lancet 2020; 39 5(10221): 361 -369