Clinical study reports submission  
 
1 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Quick guide 
Clinical Study Report s 
submission 
CTIS Training Programme – Module 13 
Version 1.2 – November 2023 
 
 
 Learning Objectives 
 
• Remember what a Clinical Study Report (CSR)  is 
• Understand how to create  and submit a CSR  
• Understand how to view, download, update and withdraw a CSR  
• Understand the roles and permissions involved in managing a CSR  
• Understand how to request the MAH Admin role  
 
 © European Medicines Agency, 2021  
 
Reproduction and/or distribution of the content of these training materials for non -commercial or 
commercial purposes is authorised, provided the European Medicines Agency is acknowledged as the source of the materials.  
 The European Medicines Agency developed this training material to enhance public access to information on the Clinical Trial Information System (CTIS). This material describes a preliminary version of CTIS and may therefore not entirely describe the system  as it is at the time of use of this 
material. The Agency does not warrant or accept any liability in relation to the use (in part or in whole) or the interpretation of the information contained in this training material by third parties
. 

Clinical study reports submission  
 
2 
  
Record of updated versions  
The table below describes the updated versions after CTIS go -live (January 2022): 
 
 
  Version  Version description  Date  
1.2 Update of references and links. November 
2023 
1.1 Minor changes applied (e.g. mistyping errors). Process of 
requesting MAH Admin role has been added . October  2022 
1.0 First version  (CTIS go -live version). March 2021 
Clinical study reports submission  
 
3 
  
Introduction 
 
Where a clinical trial is  intended to be used for obtaining a marketing authorisation for an  
investigational medicinal product, the sponsor must submit a Marketing Authorisation Application  
(MAA) . The European Regulatory  Authorities  are responsible for evaluating those  applications in 
the European Union (EU).  Once granted, the authorisation  allows sponsor to commercialise  a 
medicine and make it available to patients and healthcare professionals across the European 
Economic Area.  The process for evaluation of the MAA is not performed in CTIS  and therefore it 
will not be the focus of this module . 
As per  Article 37 of the CT Regulation , the marketing authorisation  applicants/ holders  must 
submit  a ‘Clinical Study Report’  (CSR)  to CTIS, within 30 days  after the day the marketing 
authorisation has been granted, the procedure for granting the marketing authorisation has been 
completed, or the applicant for the marketing authorisation has withdrawn the application.   
A CSR is a report of an individual study of an investigational medicinal product, in which the 
clinical and statistical description, presentations, and analyses are integrated1. The CSR includes 
a title page; a synopsis; a table of contents for the individual clinical study report; a list of abbreviations and definitions of terms; the ethics of the clinical study; the investigators and study administrative structure; the study objectives; the investigational plan; the study patients; 
the efficacy evaluation; and the safety evaluation.  At the moment of the submission, the 
information contained in the CSR will become  public . 
In CTIS , the users responsible for this action are the Marketing Authorisation Holder users 
(MAH) within the sponsor workspace . 
 
 
Article 37 (4) of the CT Regulation  also describes that i rrespective of the outcome of a clinical 
trial, the sponsor must submit  to CTIS  a summary of the results of the trial, within one year from 
the end of a clinical trial in all Member States concerned or within six months for  a trial in 
paediatric population.  The summary of results shall be accompanied by a summary written in a 
manner that is understandable to laypersons.  
It should be noted that while the summary of results and the layperson summary are to be 
provided by the sponsor  users  after the end of each clinical trial in the EU, the CSR s are to be 
 
1 ICH Topic E 3 Structure and Content of Clinical Study Reports, July 1996, European Medicines Agency. 
Available at: https://www.ema.europa.eu/en/documents/scientific -guideline/ich-e-3- structure -content-
clinical- study -reports -step-5_en.pdf   

Clinical study reports submission  
 
4 
 submitted by the MA H users only, in the case th at a clinical trial is intended to be used for 
obtaining a marketing authorisation for the investigational medicinal product.  As these process es 
are indepen dent and performed by different users, they are explained in dedicated modules: the 
focus of this module  is the submission of the CSR , while f or more information regarding 
the summary of results, users can refer to Module 5: How to manage a CT ( Notifications, Ad Hoc 
assessment, Corrective measures,  and Trial results ). 
 
 
Sections of th is quick guide  
This quick guide is structured in four sections:   
 
  
  
 
   
Roles and 
permissions  
 
 
This section provides a n explanation of 
which roles can view, submit, update and 
withdraw a CSR  and how to request the 
MAH Admin role.   
Update , 
download  and 
withdraw  a CSR 
 
 
 
This section outlines  the steps that  users  
need to follow to update, download  or 
withdraw  a CSR .  
  
Search for a CSR  
 
 This section outlines the steps that users 
need to follow  to search for a CSR  
(including an explanation of the different fields of search).  
 
Create and 
submit a CSR  
 
This section outlines the steps that users 
need to follow to create and submit new 
CSRs.  

Clinical study reports submission  
 
5 
  
 
Create and submit a CSR  
 
 
 
MAH users can access the  Clinical study reports  tab from the sponsor workspace . 
Within this tab, users with specific roles ( see section 4: Roles and permissions) can 
create  and submit  a new CSR . 
1. To do so, they need to select the ‘New’ button displayed on the left of the 
screen.   
2. After user s have clicked on the ‘New’ button, a search  interface is displayed 
where users can  search for the C linical Trial (CT) for which the y intend to 
submit the  CSR. This search functionality allows users to find the CT by 
populating one or more of the following fields:  
 
• EU CT Number: Number assigned by the system to a specific CT . 
• Member State Concerned: Member State of the European Union in which 
the CT was carried out .  
• Title: Title of the CT . 
• Submission date: Date of submission of the Initial application dossier . 
• Sponsor: Organisation submitting the Initial application dossier . 
• Decision date: Dat e in which the MSCs provided a decision on the 
authorisation of the CT in question.  
3. After the search is launched, users are able to  select one trial and then click 
on the ‘Confirm’  button at the end of the results page.  
4. Once confirmed, a pop -up window is  displayed in which  users can populate the 
CSR form (including the fields MAA procedure outcome, procedure type, date of the outcome, and MAA reference ID), upload the appropriate document(s) 
and click on  the ‘Submit’ b utton.
  
 
#CTIS  
insights  
 
Users can create a CSR 
for authorised Clinical Trials only.  
 
Create and 
submit a CSR  
A new CSR for an 
already existing Clinical 
Trial can be created and 
uploaded from the 
Clinical study reports tab 
using the ‘ + New’ 
button.  
 
If users want to cancel 
the submission they 
need to select the button 
‘Close’.  
‘New’ 
button  
EU CT 
Number  
Member 
State 
Concerned  Title 
Submission 
date Sponsor  
Decision 
date ‘Search’ 
button  
Date of 
procedure 
outcome  MAA 
procedure 
outcome  
Procedure 
type 
‘Add’ 
document 
button  
‘Submit’ 
button  
Clinical study reports submission  
 
6 
  
Search for a CSR  
 
 
MAH users  of the sponsor workspace  have the Clinical study reports tab 
available  in CTIS . 
      
1. From the Clinical study reports t ab, users can open the search functionality by 
clicking on the  drop-down  button displayed on the right side of the ‘Search’ 
field. 
 
2. Once the search functionality is opened, users can search for a specific CSR 
that has been already submitted, withdrawn  or that is in draft status, by 
populating one or more of the available search fields. The  fields include:  
 
• EU CT Number : Unique identifier of the clinical trial to which the CSR 
corresponds to.  
• Title: Trial title . 
• Procedure number  (MAA reference ID ): MAA procedure number . 
• MAA procedure outcome:  Decision that the awarding body has provided 
to the applicant for the application.  These can be: MA granted, Procedure 
for MA completed, and MA withdrawn by the applicant ( see section 3: 
Update and withdraw a CSR  for more information ). 
• Submission date : Date when CSR was submitted, as applicable . 
• Status : This s hows the status of a given CSR . These can be submitted,  
draft, or  withdrawn.  
 
3. Once the search is launched, a list of the CSRs matching the populated fields is  
displayed.  Users can select a specific CSR from the results page  by clicking on 
the checkbox located on the left of each CSR . 
 
 
CTIS Training 1  
 Test 
 Test product  
 
#CTIS  
insights  
 
The search interface of the CSR differs from that 
of other t abs as it only 
includes an Advanced 
search functionality . 
 
Search for a 
CSR 
MAH users can search 
for a specific CSR, from 
the Clinical study reports 
tab, providing they have 
the appropriate roles .  
 
Check -box 
Clinical study reports submission  
 
7 
                                                                                                                                                         
Update a CSR  
 
 
MAH users (with specific roles, more details on the last section ) can also update  an 
existing CSR.  
1. To do so, they need to search for a CSR (see section 2 : Search for a CSR) . Once 
the search is launched, the CSR matching the data populated in the search fields 
is displayed.  
 
2. Once users have identified the CSR to be updated, the y can click on the ‘Update’ 
icon (pencil) on the right side of the CSR .  
 
3. After users click on the update icon, a pop -up window is  displayed where the 
fields that are required to complete are marked with an asterisk (*). The se fields 
include : 
 
• Date of procedure outcome  
• Procedure number (MAA 
reference ID)  
• MAA procedure outcome  
• Procedure type  
• Related documents  
 
 
 
4. After user s have updated the necessary fields , they can click on the 
‘Update’ button on the bottom left corner of the pop- up window.  
 
5. The system will display a message  requesting active confirmation of the update 
of the CSR. 
 
 
    
     
  
CTIS Training 1  
 
#CTIS  
insights  
Users can save drafts of 
uncompleted CSRs by 
selecting the ‘Save’ 
button. They can access those draft versions 
and complete them via 
the ‘Clinical study 
reports’ tab. 
Details ( date of 
procedure, Procedure 
type, etc. ) pertaining 
to CSR  can be 
updated from the 
Clinical study reports 
tab using the ‘Update’  
icon (pencil).  
Update  a CSR  
Date of 
procedure 
outcome  MAA 
procedure 
outcome  
Procedure 
type 
Procedure 
number  
Related 
document  ‘Update’ 
button  
Clinical study reports submission  
 
8 
  
Download a CSR 
 
 
Users have three options to download a CSR:  
I. From the overview page of the CSR:   
1. Search the CSR from the search functionality of the Clinical study reports tab .  
2. Select the ‘ View’ icon on 
the right side of the CSR .  
3. After selecting the ‘V iew’ icon, a 
pop-up window is  displayed with all 
the information of the CSR included 
the uploaded document(s).  
4. Users can download the documents 
by selecting the ‘ Download ’ 
icon. 
 
II. From the Trial results  sub-tab of the Clinical t rial p age:  
1. Search a specific CT from the Clinical trials t ab and click on the EU CT number . 
2. Select the Trial results sub -tab of the Clinical t rial page. 
3. Go to the section ‘Clinical Study R eports’ . 
4. Select the ‘View’ icon on the right side of the CSR . 
5. After selecting the view icon, a pop -up window is displayed with all the 
information of the CSR , including  the uploaded document(s) . 
6. Users can download the documents by selecting the ‘ Download ’ icon. 
 
III. Downloading the documentation from the CT:  
1. Search a specific CT from the Clinical trials Tab and click on the EU CT number . 
2. Select  the download  button on the top -right corner of a Clinical 
trial page. 
3. Select the ‘ Clinical Study Report s’ section . 
4. Click on the S tart Download button.  
 
  
 
#CTIS  
insights  
Users can download a 
specific CSR from the 
Trial summary sub -tab 
of the CT page, by 
clicking on the EU CT 
number listed on the 
search results from the 
Clinical trials tab .  
CSRs data can be 
downloaded  through 
three paths , providing 
users have CSR 
related roles (more 
details on the last 
section) : 
1) From the overview 
page of the CSR  
2) From the Trial 
results sub -tab of the 
Clinical trial page  
3) Downloading all 
the documentation 
from the CT  
 
Download a 
CSR 
View icon  
‘Start 
download’ 
button  
Clinical Study 
Reports 
section  Download 
icon 

Clinical study reports submission  
 
9 
  
 
Withdraw a CSR  
 
 
 
 
MAH roles can also withdraw  a CSR2:  
1. To do so, they  need to search for a CSR ( see section 1: Search for a CSR). Once 
the search is launched, the CSR matching the data populated in the search fields 
is displayed.  
 
2. Once user s have identified  the CSR to be withdrawn , they can click on the 
‘Update’ icon on the right side of the CSR.  
 
3. After user s click on the update button, a pop -up window is  displayed. In order to 
withdraw a CSR,  a justification for its withdrawal is required. 
 
 
4. After providing the justification user s can click on the ‘Withdraw’ button at the 
bottom right corner of the pop -up window.  
 
5. After user s have clicked on the ‘W ithdraw ’ button, a message requesting the 
active confirmation for the withdrawal will appear.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
2 For more information  on the implications of the withdrawal of a CSR, refer to the FAQs 
document of this module.  
 
#CTIS  
insights  
A notice will be 
generated informing the sponsor responsible of the CT (and 
providing the user has 
CSR related roles) that 
a CSR correspond ing to 
it has been submitted or withdrawn in CTIS.  
Users can withdraw a 
submitted CSR. To do 
so, they are required 
to provide  a suitable 
justification for the 
withdrawal.  
Withdraw a 
CSR 

Clinical study reports submission  
 
10 
 Roles and permissions  
 
CTIS is a role -based system  that enables users to perform different actions 
depending on the permission s attached  to the  roles assigned to them by a user 
from their organisation  with administrator permissions.  
 
In relation to the CSR process , three roles  (from the MAH user group) are  involved:  
Marketing Authorisation Holder  Admin (MAH Admin), CSR Viewer , and CSR 
Submitter.  
 Users can request the MAH Admin role by raising a ticket to CTIS User Service Desk . 
In their tickets, they need to attach an affiliation letter (a template provided by 
EMA), signed by a representative of the MAH/MAA.  Us ers need to fill in the affiliation 
letter details such as the clinical trial for which the MAH Admin role is requested, as 
well as personal data (full name, email) and sponsor organisation data. 
 
E
MA, after receiving the request, will validate it and will proceed with assigning the 
MAH Admin role for the trials, listed in the affiliation letter.  The MAH A dmin user is 
able to assign the role s of CSR S ubmitter or V iewer to other CTIS users.  This can 
be done for one or several trials.  
 
The MAH Admin or the CSR  Submitter  users can then submit the CSR for the trials 
for which the role ha ve been granted, as well as update or  withdraw CSR(s) . The 
CSR Viewers can only view  CSRs (including the  drafts) but cannot submit, update 
or withdraw CSRs . 
  
 
 
 
Matching of  roles and permissions with the actions to be performed in CTIS  
 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
#CTIS  
insights  
The permission 
levels are structured in a cascade system 
where the lowest 
level is  viewing 
permissions, and the 
highest level is  
submitting 
permissions.  
Roles and 
permissions  
There are three roles 
in the MAH user 
group :  
1) MAH Admin  
2) CSR Submitter  
3) CSR Viewer  
 

Clinical study reports submission  
 
11 
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
European Medicines Agency  
Domenico Scarlattilaan 6  
1083 HS Amsterdam 
The Netherlands  
Telephone +31 (0)88 781 6000  
Send a question www.ema.europa.eu/contact  
www.ema.europa.eu  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Clinical Trials Information System (CTIS) 
Quick guide: Clinical Study Report 
submission . 
 
© European Medicines Agency, 2021 .