 
GSK Public policy position s 
 
 
A publication of GlaxoSmithKline Communications and Government Affairs  1 
 
 
Public Disclosure of Clinical Research  
 
The Issue  
  
The pharmaceutical industry communicates the results of its clinical research by publishing in scientific 
journals; by presenting results at scientific congresses; and, in line with established industry 
commitments and evolving legal requirements , by postin g information and results on internet -based 
public registers. This disclosure  is in addition to submission of information to national or regi onal 
regulatory authorities as  part of the product development or approval process.  
 
Despite this, however, concern s have been raised by some stakeholders about:  
 
– whether study results which may be viewed as “negative” for companies’ medicines are published 
in scientific literature;  
– whether published studies accurately reflect the conduct of the study;  
– whether some journal articles are “ghost -written” (where doctors put their name to articles written 
by pharmaceuti cal companies);  
– the lack of access to the underlying patient level data that is collected during the study.  
 
This paper outlines GSK’s approach to addressing these issues . It is an approach  that dates back to 
2004 when we bec ame the first company to launch an internet -based clinical study register 
http://www.gsk -clinicalstudyregister.com/  providing result summaries from our clinical trials of 
marketed medicines (i.e pharmaceuticals and vaccines) irrespective of the study outcome. It has 
evolved significantly as we have sought new ways of enhanc ing the transparency  of our clinical 
research , including that conducted by our consumer healthcare division . GSK’s disclosure policy goes 
beyond what is required by laws and regulations . 
 
GSK’s Position   
 
– Before the first subject is enrolled in a study, w e post protocol summaries of GSK -sponsored 
interventional and non -interventional studies  on internet registers . This include s phase I -IV clinical 
trials of both investigational and marketed medicines  and consumer healthcare products . This 
commitment also includes  pooled analyses/meta -analyses  that evaluate our products . 
 
– We post all studies  that enrol participants  on ClinicalTrials.gov ( http://www.clinicaltrials.gov ). In 
addition, we post studies that retrospectively analyse information from previous studies on  
our Clinical Study Register (http://ww w.gsk -clinicalstudyregister.com/ ).   
 
– Irrespective of the outcome of the study, w e post result summaries  within  12 months of primary 
completion date for interventional studies and 12  months from the completion of analysis for non-
interventional studies. We do not wait until approval or termination of the medicine before posting 
result summaries.  At the time of results ’ registration, we also post the full protocol and the statistical 
analysis plan . 
 
– Our commitment includes posting results from studies of ter minated compounds in order to help 
inform the scientific community about non -productive areas of research and to reduce unnecessary 
exposure of study participants to similar compounds in other clinical trials.  
 
– GSK’s commitment to post protocol summa ries, analysis plans and result  summaries for all Phase 
I studies ( in addition to Phases II-IV) to ClinicalTrials.gov , goes beyond what is  currently  required 
by law s and regulation s in the US and EU.  Equally, our policy of posting a similar level of detail for 
all our non -interventional studies  to GSK’s Clinical Study Register goes beyond current legal and 
regulatory requirements.   
 
 

GSK Public policy position s   
 
 
A publication of GlaxoSmithKline Communications and Government Affairs  2 
– In order to  support a broader understanding of our clinical research , in 2017 we began posting  some  
plain language summaries to our Clinical Study Register . As we gain experience and feedback on 
these summaries we will increasingly include them alongside the result  summaries of our  clinical 
studies.  We will also use these summaries to help communicate t he result s of our clinical research 
to those who participated  in our studies .  
 
– We consider the  above  postings on the internet to be supplementary to, and not a replacement for, 
the need to publish studies in peer reviewed journals. Our approach is to  subm it studies as more 
comprehensive manuscripts for publication in peer revi ewed journals , with an increasing focus on 
open access journals , that are indexed by online search engines  such as Medline and Embase . The 
manuscripts are submitted  within  18 months  of study completion , regardless of market authori sation  
or termination .  
 
– All interventional  and non-interventional studies that evaluate our products, and non -product studies 
that provide important scientific knowledge or are relevant for patient care, are submitted  for 
publication .  
 
– GSK’s policy prohibits “ghost writing” of journal manuscripts and abstracts by requiring authorship 
and acknowledgements for scientific publications consistent with the requirements of the 
International Committee of Medical  Journal Editors (ICMJE). GSK and external medical writers are 
either named as authors or included in the acknowledgement section of manuscripts.  
 
– Since  December 2013 , we have made  Clinical Study Reports (C SRs1) publicly available through 
our Clinical Study Register , once the medicine being studied is approved or terminated from 
development .  We have also posted CSRs for interventional clinical trials (phase I -IV) for approved 
and terminated medicines  dating back to the formation of GSK in 2000, as well all non-interventional 
studies  conducted since 2009  that have evaluate d the safety and efficacy of our medicines .  
 
– The names of the investigators who participate in our clinical studies that were initiated after January 
2009 are available on  our Clinical Study Register.  GSK also discloses payments made to healthcare 
professionals (HCPs) and healthcare organisations  (HCOs)  involved in GSK -sponsored clinical 
trials in markets including  the USA, Europe, Japan and Australia.  This commitment began in March 
2011, with disclosure of individual payments made to US HCPs and their HCOs for research studies 
initiated from January 2010 onwards. While i n Europe , we have published our transfers of value 
made to HCPs and  their HCOs for research activities as an aggregat e figure since 2016 .  
 
– In May 2013 , GSK launched an online system to enable  researchers to request access to 
anonymised patient level data from globally conducted GSK clinical trials  (phase I -IV) of medicines 
started since 2000 . Studies are listed on this system within six months of publication.  This system 
is now also used by 12 other industry sponsors and we  are working with them to  attract other 
industry and non -industry sponsors to expand  the site. Requests for access to participant level data 
from Consumer Healthcare studies may also be submitted through this system.  
 
– We reinforce these commitments by continually assessing our performance.   A monthly dashboard 
of metrics on our transparency activities is maintained as pa rt of our internal business monitoring.  
 
Background   
 
The Clinical Development Process  
 
Evaluation of an  investigational product  is done through  interventional  clinical trials and is usually 
conducted in four main phases. Each phase addresses different questions that determine if testing 
should  proceed to the next phase.  
 
                                                      
1 CSRs are formal study reports that provide more details on the design, methods and results of clinical trials and form the ba sis 
of submissions to the US FDA, EMA and other regulatory agencies. Patient data in the CSRs and appendices with patient data 
listings are removed to protect  patient confidentiality.  

GSK Public policy position s   
 
 
A publication of GlaxoSmithKline Communications and Government Affairs  3 
Phase I : Phase I studies are primarily concerned with assessing the investigational product’s safety 
usually in a small number of healthy human volunteers (typically between 20 and 100 people) and are 
designed to determine what happens to the investigational product  in the human body.  
 
Phase II:   An investigational product that passes Phase I testing the n moves on to Phase II, which 
usually includes the “proof of concept” stage. Here for the first time, it is generally administered to 
carefully selected patients suffering from the disease which the product will potentially treat.  Generally 
100–300 patien ts are enrolled in these Phase II studies. Prophylactic vaccine trials enroll up to several 
hundred healthy volunteers. Therapeutic vaccine trials enrol volunteers who are already infected or 
have the disease.  
 
The aim of the studies is to determine if the  investigational product  addresses the illness it is intended 
for, as well as the amount and frequency of dosing necessary to achieve the optimal benefits for 
patients with the fewest side effects.  
 
Phase III:  In Phase III  studies, the investigational product is given to hundreds and frequently 
thousands of patients.  Phase III studies require differing periods of time to complete, depending on 
the disease being studied.  
 
Phase IV:  Trials of an investigational  product  may continue after it has been approved for marketing. 
Known as Phase IV trials, they may further evaluate the effect of the product for the approved use ; 
assess other potential uses ; or yield additional safety data. Regulatory agencies may require these 
trials to address specific questions.  
 
Other types of clinical research, such as non-interventional  research  (using data collected during the 
provision of routine healthcare) and analyses  of data that is combined from a number of clinical trials 
(e.g. meta -analyses), are increasingly seen as important evidence in the evaluation of the risks and 
benefits of  products . 
 
GSK & Clinical Research Data  
 
The guiding principle for GSK is to disclose publicly the results of GSK -sponsored clinical research 
that evaluates our product s, irrespective of whether the results are likely to be perceived as positive 
or negative.  Likewise, we require investigator spo nsored studies supported by GSK to  be conduct ed 
and publicly disclose d consistent with our policies . 
 
To inform investigators of the outcome of a GSK -sponsored trial , GSK aims to provides them with a 
summary of the overall trial results which we  encourage  them to  share with study participants.  
 
Internet -based Registration of Ongoing Clinical Trials  
 
Publicly available internet -based registration o f ongoing clinical research can help to increase  
participation. It also provides an important reference point so interested parties can track the 
subsequent public disclosure of the results.  
 
Publication and Internet -based Posting of Clinical Research Results  
 
Traditionally, research results have been  publicly disclosed via publication in peer reviewed scientific 
literature; however, there are well recognised constraints associated with this approach. With limited 
journal capacity, some studies or analyses may not be considered a priority by some journ als, and 
therefore may not be accepted for publication.  
 
Posting result summaries on internet -based registers is part of a solution as it ensures that the results 
of clinical studies are available in the public domain whether or not they are accepted for p ublication.  
 
Regulatory requirements to disclose research results have therefore  arisen and numerous public 
registers [ e.g. http://www.clinicaltrials.gov/ ] have been established to serve as repositories for this 
information.  

GSK Public policy position s   
 
 
A publication of GlaxoSmithKline Communications and Government Affairs  4 
Where  we are not the sponsor of a study, for example , where we support a study by providing a GSK 
product,  we require external researchers to post protocol and result summaries on intern et-based 
registers and submit the results for publication in a searchable peer -reviewed journal.   
 
Authorship  
 
Authorship and acknowledgements for manuscripts follow ICMJE criteria (http://www.icmje.org ) and 
are determined based on the level of intellectual contribution to study design, data acquisition, analysis 
and interpretation, and writing or revising the manuscript. Some journals , however, have a more  
narrow definition of authorship and this conventi on is followed for such journals.    
 
The named primary author for a paper must actively participate in the drafting process and lead the 
content development of manuscripts. The primary author  works closely with co-authors  and together 
they have  final appr oval authority for the manuscript. Any GSK staff or contractors such as professional 
medical writers who contribute to the development of manuscripts for authors (e.g. assistance in 
assembling initial drafts, tables and figures, collating co -author comment s and revising the document 
based on author input) are named in the article either as authors when their contribution meets 
authorship criteria , or by description of their contribution within the acknowledgements section.  
 
GSK will provide authors full acc ess to data supporting the publication including access to data tables, 
final study reports, case report forms and raw data as needed.  We d o not suppress or veto submission 
of manuscripts;  though  the timing of submissions may on occasion need to be delayed  to allow GSK 
the opportunity to seek necessary intellectual property protection.   
 
GSK generally does not support publication of data from a n individual centre  in a multi -centre trial. It 
is GSK's position that the results from the entire trial should be  published before information from 
individual centres is published , and that individual centre data should always reference the primary 
publication of the entire study.   
 
Access to Patient Level Data  
 
Publication of clinical studies in the scientific literature and result summaries on registers typically only 
contain aggregated data. These publications therefore have limitations for those who wish to examine 
the data more closely or to combine it with o ther studies in meta -analyses. To address these 
limitations, there needs to be greater access to underlying patient level data. In May 2013, we therefore 
established an online system to allow  researchers to request  access to anonymised patient level data 
from GSK sponsored clinical trials.  
 
Clinical studies for our medicines are listed on the website within 6 months of publication of the primary 
endpoints of the study . Studies that have not been accepted for publication and are no longer being 
progressed are also available, as are studies of approved medicines for indications that are terminated 
from development.   
 
Anonymised patient level data is made available from  GSK  medicine s’ studies provided that an 
external Independent Review Panel approves an asso ciated research proposal and the investigator 
signs a Data Sharing Agreement. The Independent Review Panel accepts or rejects proposals based 
on the scientific rationale and relevance to medical science or patient care. The Panel also considers 
the qualifi cations of the investigators , the management of potential conflicts of interest  and publication 
plans .  
 
Access to the data is provided in a secure  manner to  help ensure patient privacy is protected  and the 
data is used only for the intended purpose .  
 
Together with other sponsors of clinical trials, GSK is encouraging a broader sharing of clinical trial 
data to enable  researchers to combine data from multiple sponsors  (both industry and non -industry ), 
and to help ensure that the contribution of study volun teers to medical innovation is fully realised.  
 
September 2018  

